[]{#pers}**15. Chapter: On perserverance in actions**

> Allah Almighty says*, \"Has the time not arrived for the hearts of
> those who believe to yield to the remembrance of Allah and to the
> Truth He has sent down and not to be like those who were given the
> Book before for whom the time seemed over long so that their hearts
> became hard?\"* (57:16) and the Almighty says, *\"Then We sent Our
> Messengers following in their footsteps and sent \'Isa son of Maryam
> after them, giving him the Injil. We put compassion and mercy in the
> hearts of those who followed him. They invented monasticism ­ We did
> not prescribe it for them ­ purely out of desire for the pleasure of
> Allah, but even so they did not observe it as it should have been
> observed.\"* (57:27) The Almighty says*, \"Do not be like a woman who
> spoils the thread she has spun by unravelling it after it is
> strong.\"* (16:92) and the Almighty says, *\"And worship your Lord
> until what is Certain comes to you.\"* (15:99)

The hadiths regarding this include the hadith of \'A\'isha, \"The *deen*
He likes best is the one in which there is constancy,\" which is in the
previous chapter.

153\. \'Umar ibn al-Khattab reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"If anyone sleeps through
his *hizb* in the night, or through something else he normally does, and
then recites between the *Fajr* prayer and the *Dhuhr* prayer, it is
written for it as if he had recited it during the night.\" \[Muslim\]

154\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr ibn al-\'As said, \"The Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said to me, \"\'Abdullah, do
not be like so-and-so who used to pray at night and then stopped doing
it.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

155\. \'A\'isha said, \"When the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, missed the night prayers due to illness or some
other reason, he would pray twelve *rak\'ats* during the day.\"
\[Muslim\]

[]{#follow}**16. Chapter: On the command to follow the Sunna and its
adab**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Whatever the Messenger gives you you should
> accept, and whatever he forbids you you should forgo,\"* (59:7) and
> the Almighty say*s, \"He does not speak from whim. It nothing but
> Revelation revealed.\"* (53:3-4) The Almighty says, *\"Say: \'If you
> love Allah, then follow me and Allah will love you and forgive you for
> your wrong actions,\"* (3:31) and the Almighty says, *\"You have an
> excellent model in the Messenger of Allah for all who put their hope
> is in Allah and the Last Day.\"* (33:21) The Almighty says, *\"No, by
> your Lord, they are not believers until they make you their judge in
> the disputes that break out between them, and then find no resistance
> within themselves to what you decide and submit themselves
> completely,\"* (4:64; H4:65) and the Almighty says, *\"If you have a
> dispute about something, refer it back to Allah and the Messenger.*\"
> (W4:58; H4:59) Scholars say that this means the Book and the Sunna.
> The Almighty says, *\"Whoever obeys the Messenger has obeyed Allah\"*
> (W4:79; H4:80) and the Almighty says, *\"Truly you are guiding to a
> Straight Path,\"* (W42:49; H42:52) and the Almighty says, *\"Those who
> oppose his command should beware of a testing trial coming to them or
> a painful punishment striking them.\"* (W24:61: H24:63) The Almighty
> says, *\"And remember the Signs of Allah and the wise words which are
> recited in your rooms.\"* (33:34)

156\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Stay with what I have left you \[without asking
more\]. Those before you were destroyed by their excessive questioning
and disagreeing with their Prophets. When I forbid you to do something,
avoid it, and when I command you to do something, do it as much as you
are able.\" \[Agreed upon\]

157\. Abu Nujayh al-\'Irbad ibn Sariya said, \"The Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, gave us a profound exhortation
which made our hearts afraid and our eyes weep. We said, \'O Messenger
of Allah, it is an exhortation which is as if it were bidding us
farewell, so advise us. He said, \'I commend you to be fearful of Allah
and to hear and obey, even if an \[Abyssinian\] slave is put in command
over you. Any among you who live will see much disagreement, so you must
hold to my Sunna and the Sunna of the rightly-guided and guiding
khalifs. Hold onto it with your teeth. Beware of new matters. Every
innovation is misguidance.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

158\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"All of my community will enter the
Garden except those who refuse.\" He was asked, \"Who are those who
refuse, Messenger of Allah?\" He said, \"Those who obey me will enter
the Garden and those who disobey me refuse.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

159\. Abu Muslim - and it is said Abu Iyas - Salama ibn \'Amr ibn
al-Akwa\' reported is that a man ate with the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, using his left hand, and he said,
\"Eat with your right hand.\" He said, \"I cannot.\" He said, \"Then you
cannot.\" Only pride had stopped him and he could not raise it to his
mouth. \[Muslim\]

160\. An-Nu\'man ibn Bashir said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \"Make your rows straight or
Allah will cause disagreements between you.\" \[Agreed upon\]

In a variant of Muslim, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, used to straighten our rows to such an extent that
it was as arrows could be straightened by them. This continued until he
saw that we had understood that. Then one day he came out to us and
stood for the prayer until he was about to say the takbir. Then he saw
the chest of a bedouin man protruding from the line. He said, \'Slaves
of Allah! Make your rows straight or Allah will cause disagreements
between you.\'\"

161\. Abu Musa said, \"A house burned down on top of its inhabitants in
Madina one night and when the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, was informed about it, he said, \'Fire is an enemy
to you. When you go to sleep, put it out.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

162\. Abu Musa reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"The example of the guidance and knowledge
with which Allah has sent me is like the abundant rain which strikes the
earth. Some of it is fertile and accepts the water and brings forth
plants and grass in abundance. Some of it is hard and holds the water
enabling Allah to let people use it. They drink from it, water their
animals and irrigate. Some of the land it strikes is level and barren
and does not retain the water nor produce plants. The first is the
example of someone who understands the deen of Allah and benefits from
that with which Allah has sent me and learns and teaches. The last is
the example of the person who pays no attention to it and does not
accept the guidance with which I have been sent.\" \[Agreed upon\]

163\. Jabir reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"The metaphor of me and you is that of a man
who lights a fire and the grasshoppers and moths begin to fall into it
and he chases them away from it. I pull you by your belts back from the
Fire while you are doing your best to slip from my hand.\" \[Muslim\]

164\. Jabir reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, commanded people to lick their fingers and the
plate, saying, \'You do not know where the blessing lies.\'\" \[Muslim

In one variant of it, \"When one of you drops a morsel of food, he
should pick it up, remove any dirt on it and then eat it, not leaving it
for Shaytan. He should not wipe his hand with a cloth until he has
licked his fingers. He does not know in which part of his food the
blessing lies.\"

In one variant of it, \"Shaytan is present with each one of you in every
thing you do, he is even present with you when you eat. So when you drop
a morsel of food, you should remove any dirt on it and eat it and not
leave it for Shaytan.\"

165\. Ibn \'Abbas said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, stood up among us to admonish us and said, \'O
people! You will be gathered to Allah Almighty barefoot, naked and
uncircumcised. *\"As We originated the first creation, so We will
regenerate it. It a promise binding on Us. That is what We will do.\"*
(21:103) The first of creatures to be clothed on the Day of Rising will
be Ibrahim. Men of my community will come and will be taken to the left.
I will say, \"O Lord, my Companions!\" and it will be said, \"You do not
know what innovations they introduced after you.\" I will say the same
as the righteous slave (\'Isa) said, *\"I was a witness against them as
long as I remained among them\"* to *\"The Almighty, the All-Wise.\"*
(5:117-118)) I will be told, \"They never stopped turning back on their
heels from the time you left them.\"\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

166\. Abu Sa\'id \'Abdullah ibn Mughaffal said, \"The Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, forbade flicking pebbles
with two fingers and said, \'It does not kill game and does finish off
the enemy, but rather it gouges out an eye or breaks a tooth.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

In one variant is that a relative of Ibn Mughaffal flicked a stone and
he forbade him to do it and said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, forbade flicking stones and said, \'It
does not kill game.\'\" Then he did it again and he said, \'Did I not
tell you that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, forbade it and yet you again flick stones! I will never speak to
you again.\'\"

167\. \'Abis ibn Rabi\'a said, \"I saw \'Umar ibn al-Khattab kiss the
Black Stone. He kissed it and said, \'I know that you are a merely a
stone which can bestow neither harm nor benefit. If it had not been that
I had seen the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, kiss you, I would not have kissed you.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

[]{#obey}**17. Chapter: On the Obligation to obey the judgement of
Allah, what is said by those who are summoned to that, and commanding
the right and forbidding the wrong**

> *Allah Almighty says, \"No, by your Lord, they are not believers until
> they make you their judge in the disputes that break out between them,
> and then find no resistance within themselves to what you decide and
> submit themselves completely,\"* (4:64; H4:65) and the Almighty says,
> *\"The reply of the believers when they are summoned to Allah and His
> Messenger so that he can judge between them, is to say, \'We hear and
> we obey.\' They are the one who are successful.\"* (W24:49; H24:51)

168\. Abu Hurayra who said, \"When this verse*: \'Everything in the
heavens and everything in the earth belongs to Allah. Whether you
divulge what is in yourselves or keep it hidden, Allah will still call
you to account for it,\'* (2:283) came down on the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, it was hard for the Companions
of the Messenger of Allah to bear. So they went to the Messenger of
Allah, and knelt and said, \'O Messenger of Allah, we have been
obligated to do actions of which we are capable ­ the prayer, jihad,
fasting and *sadaqa*. Now this ayat has been sent down on you and we are
not capable of bearing it.\' The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \'Do you want to say as the people of the two
Books before you said, \"We hear and rebel?\" Rather say, \"We hear and
obey. Your forgiveness, our Lord, and the return is to You.\"\' When the
people recited it and their tongues obeyed, Allah Almighty sent down
after it, *\'The Messenger believes in what has been sent down to him
from his Lord, and so do the believers. Each one believes in Allah and
His angels and His Books and His Messengers, We do not differentiate
between any of his Messengers.\" They say: \"We hear and we obey.
Forgive us, our Lord! You are our journey\'s end.\"\'* When they did
that, Allah Almighty abrogated it and Allah, the Mighty and Exalted,
sent down, *\'Allah does not impose on any self any more than it can
stand. For it is what it has earned; against it is what it has
warranted. Our Lord, do not take us to task if we forget or make a
mistake! Our Lord, do not place on us a load like the one You placed on
those before us! Our Lord, do not place on us a load which we have not
the strength to bear! And pardon us; and forgive us; and have mercy on
us. You are our Master so help us against the people of the
rejectors.\"*\' He said, \'Yes.\'\" \[Muslim\]

[]{#bida}**18. Chapter: On the prohibition against innovations and new
matters**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"And what is there after truth except
> misguidance?\"* (10:32) and the Almighty says, \"*We have not omitted
> anything from the Book.\"* (W6:39; H6:38) The Almighty says, *\"If you
> have a dispute about something, refer it back to Allah and the
> Messenger\"* (W4:58; H4:59) i.e. the Book and the Sunna, and the
> Almighty says, *\"This is My Path and it is straight, so follow it. Do
> not follow other ways or you will become cut off from His Way.\"*
> (W6:154; H6:153) The Almighty says, *\"Say: \'If you love Allah, then
> follow me and Allah will love you and forgive you for your wrong
> actions,\"* (3:31) and the ayats about this topic are numerous and
> well-known.

169\. \'A\'isha said that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who introduces an innovation in this
affair of ours which is not part of it, it will be rejected.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

In a variant of Muslim, \"Anyone who does an action which is not in
accordance with this affair of ours will be rejected.\"

170\. Jabir said, \"While the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, was delivering an address, his eyes would become
red, he would raise his voice and he would become very angry until he
was like someone admonishing an army. He would say, \"(Guard youselves
against attack) in the morning and the evening.\' He would say, \'I have
been sent at a time when I and the Last Hour are like these two,\' and
he joined together his index finger and middle finger.\' He would say,
\'Following on from that: the best speech is the Book of Allah. The best
guidance is the guidance of Muhammad, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace. The worst of matters are the new ones, and every innovation is
misguidance.\' Then he would say, \'I am more entitled to every believer
than his own self. Whoever leaves property, it is for his family.
Whoever leaves a debt or family, it is for me and on me.\" \[Muslim\]

Al-\'Irbad ibn Sariyya has his hadith which is in the Chapter on
Following the Sunna (157).

[]{#sunna}**19. Chapter: On the one who makes a good or bad sunna**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Those who say, \'Our Lord, give us joy in our
> wives and children and make us a good example for those who have
> taqwa.\"* (25:74) and the Almighty says, *\"We made them leaders,
> guiding by Our command.\"* (W21:72; H21:73)

171\. Abu \'Amr Jarir ibn \'Abdullah said, \"Once we were with the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, at the
beginning of the day when some people came, barefoot, wearing striped
garments or cloaks, girded with swords. Most of them were from Mudar,
indeed, all of them were from Mudar. The face of Messenger of Allah
hanged because his concern at what he saw of their extreme need. He went
inside and then came out and commanded Bilal to give the adhan and the
iqama. He prayed and then spoke and said*, \'O mankind! have taqwa of
your Lord who created you from a single person\' to the end of the
verse, \'Allah watches over you continually.\'* (4:1) and the other
verse which is at the end of al-Hashr, *\'O you who believe! Have taqwa
of Allah, and let each self look to what it has sent forward for
Tomorrow.\'* (59:18) \'Let a man give from his dinars and his dirhams,
from his clothes, from the sa\' of his wheat, from the sa\' of his
dates, even,\' he said, \'a half of a date.\' A man of the Ansar brought
a bag which he could barely get his hand round, indeed, he could not.
Then the people came one after another until I saw two heaps of food and
clothes and I saw the face of the Messenger of Allah shining as if it
was illuminated. The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, said, \'Anyone who creates a good sunna in Islam has its
reward and the reward of whoever does it after him without that
decreasing his reward in any way. Anyone who creates a bad sunna in
Islam bears its burden and the burden of whoever acts by it after him
without that decreasing his burden in any way.\" \[Muslim\]

172\. Ibn Mas\'ud reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"No self is unjustly killed without
responsibility for it falling on the elder son of Adam because he was
the first to make a sunna of murder.\" \[Agreed upon\]

[]{#show}**20. Chapter: On showing the way to good and calling to
guidance or misguidance**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Call people to your Lord,\"* (28:87) and the
> Almighty says, *\"Call to the way of your Lord with wisdom and fair
> admonition,\"* (16:125) and the Almighty says, *\"Help each other to
> goodness and taqwa,\"* (5:2) and the Almighty says, *\"Let there be a
> community among you who call to the good.\"* (3:104)

173\. Abu Mas\'ud \'Uqba ibn \'Amr al-Ansari al-Badri reported that the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said,
\"Anyone who shows the way to something good has the same reward as the
person who does it.\" \[Muslim\]

174\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who calls people to guidance has
the same reward as that received by those who follow it, without that
decreasing their reward in any way. Anyone who calls people to
misguidance, is attributed with wrong actions the the same as those of
those who follow it, without that decreasing their wrong actions in any
way.\" \[Muslim\]

175\. Abu\'l-\'Abbas Sahl ibn Sa\'d as-Sa\'idi reported that the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said on the
Day of Khaybar, \"I will give the banner tomorrow to a man at whose
hands Allah will conquer. He loves Allah and His Messenger and Allah and
his Messenger love him.\" They spent the night wondering who it would be
given to, and in the morning the people came to the Messenger of Allah,
all of them hoping to get it. He said, \"Where is \'Ali ibn Abi Talib?\"
He was told, \"He has something wrong with his eyes.\" He said, \"Send
for him.\" He was brought and the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, spat in his eyes and made supplication for him,
and it was healed as if there had never been anything wrong with him. He
gave him the banner. \'Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, said,
\"Messenger of Allah, shall I fight them until they become the same as
us?\" He said, \"Take it easy until you alight in their quarter and then
invite them to Islam and tell them what is incumbent on them regarding
the rights of Allah Almighty. By Allah, for one man to be guided by you
is better for you than having red camels.\" \[Agreed upon\]

176\. Anas reported that a lad from Aslam said, \"Messenger of Allah, I
want to go on an expedition, but I do not have the wherewithal with
which to prepare myself. He said, \'Go to so-and-so. He has made
preparations but has fallen ill.\' He said, \'The Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, greets you and says to give me
what you have prepared.\' He said, \'Girl, give him what I have prepared
and do not hold anything back. By Allah, you should not hold back any of
it and it will be a blessing for you.\'\" \[Muslim\]

[]{#help}**21. Chapter: Helping one another to goodness and fear of
Allah**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Help each other to goodness and taqwa,\"*
> (5:2) and the Almighty says, *\"By the Late Afternoon, truly man is in
> loss. Except for those who believe and do right actions and encourage
> each other to the truth and encourage each other to steadfastn*ess.\"
> (103:1-4)

177\. Abu \'Abdu\'r-Rahman Zayd ibn Khalid al-Juhani reported that the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said,
\"Anyone who equips a fighter in the way of Allah fights as well and
anyone who looks after a fighter\'s family during his absence fights as
well.\" \[Agreed upon\]

178\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, sent an expedition to the Banu
Lihyan of Hudhayl. He said, \"Let every two men send one more man, and
the reward will be for both of them.\" \[Muslim\]

179\. Ibn \'Abbas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, encountered a caravan at ar-Rawha\' and said,
\"Who are you?\" They said, \"Muslims.\" They said, \"Who are you? He
said, \"The Messenger of Allah.\" A woman presented a child to him and
said, \"Can this one make hajj?\" He said, \"Yes, and you will have a
reward.\" \[Muslim\]

180\. Abu Musa al-Ash\'ari reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"A trustworthy Muslim agent who carries
out what he is instructed to do fully, generously and cheerfully, and
pays it to the person to whom he was ordered to pay it, is one of those
who give *sadaqa*.\" \[Agreed upon\]

[]{#counsel}**22. Chapter: On Good Counsel**

> Allah says, *\"The believers are brothers,\"* (49:10), and the
> Almighty said, reporting about Nuh, *\"I am giving you good counsel,\"
> (7:62) and about Hud, \"I am a faithful counsellor to you.\"* (7:68)

181\. Abu Ruqayya Tamim ibn Aws ad-Dari reported the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"The deen is good counsel.\" We
said, \"For whom?\" He said, \"For Allah, His Book, His Messenger, the
Imams of the Muslims and their common people.\"

182\. Jarir ibn \'Abdullah said, \"I gave allegiance to the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, on the basis of performing the
prayer, paying the zakat and giving good counsel to every Muslim.\"

183\. Anas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"None of you can truly be said to believe until
he wants for his brother what he wants for himself.\"

[]{#amr}**23. Chapter: On commanding the right and forbidding the
wrong**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Let there be a community among you who call to
> the good, and enjoin the right, and forbid the wrong. They are the
> ones who have success.\"* (3:104) The Almighty says, *\"You are the
> best nation ever to be produced before mankind. You enjoin the is
> right, forbid the wrong.\"* (3:110). The Almighty says, *\"Make
> allowances for people, command what is right, and turn away from the
> ignorant,\"* (7:199) and the Almighty says, *\"The believers, men and
> women, are friends of one another. They command what is right and
> forbid what is wrong.\"* (9:71) The Almighty says, *\"Those among the
> Tribe of Israel who rejected were cursed on the tongue of Dawud and
> that of \'Isa, son of Maryam. That is because they rebelled and
> overstepped the limits. They would not restrain one another from any
> of the wrong things that they did. How evil were the things they used
> to do!\"* (5:78-79) and the Almighty says, *\"Say: \'It is the truth
> from your Lord; so let whoever wishes believe and whoever wishes
> reject.\'\"* (18:29) The Almighty says, *\"Proclaim what you have been
> ordered to,\"* (15:94) and the Almighty says, *\"We rescued those who
> forbidden the evil and seized those who did wrong with a harsh
> punishment because they were deviators.\"* (7:165)

184\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \'Whoever of you sees
something wrong should change it with his hand; if he cannot, then with
his tongue; if he cannot, then with his heart, and that is the weakest
form of belief.\'\" \[Muslim\]

185\. Ibn Mas\'ud reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace,said, \"There is no Prophet sent by Allah to a
community before me who did not have disciples in his community and
companions, who took on his sunna and obeyed his command. Then after
them successors followed who said things they did not do and did things
they were not ordered to do. All who fought against them with their
hands were believers, all who fought against them with their tongues
were believers and all who fought against them in their hearts were
believers. There is not a mustard-seed\'s worth of belief beyond
that.\'\" \[Muslim\]

186\. Abu\'l-Walid \'Ubada ibn as-Samit said, \"We gave allegiance to
the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, to hear
and obey in hardship and ease, in things we liked and things we
disliked, to prefer others to ourselves and not to go against those in
command unless we saw open disbelief for which there was definite proof
from Allah.\" \[Agreed upon\]

187\. An-Nu\'man ibn Bashir reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The metaphor of someone who stops at
the limits of Allah and someone who transgresses them is that of some
people who draw lots on a boat. Some of them get the upper deck and some
of them the lower. When those in the lower deck want to get water, they
have to pass by those above them. Then they say, \'If we were to make a
hole in our deck, we would not have to bother those above us.\' If they
were to let them do what they wanted, all of them would perish. If they
seize hold of their hands and stop them, they will be saved and all of
them will be saved.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

188\. Umm al-Mu\'minin, Umm Salama Hind bint Abi Umayya Hudhayfa
reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
said, \"Amirs will be placed over you and you will acknowledge and
object to (some of what they do). Anyone who shows dislike is innocent
and anyone who objects is safe. However, there will be those who are
content and follow them.\" They said, \"Messenger of Allah, should we
not fight them?\" He said, \"No, not as long as they establish the
prayer among you.\" \[Muslim\]

It means that whoever feels dislike in his heart but is unable to object
with his hand or tongue is free of wrong action and has fulfilled his
duty. Whoever objects according to his ability, is safe from any
disobedience. Whoever is content with what they do and follows them is
at fault.

189\. Umm al-Mu\'minin, Umm al-Hakim Zaynab bint Jahsh reported that
once the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, became upset
and said, \"There is no god but Allah. Woe to the Arabs from an evil
which is drawing near! An opening has been made in the wall of Ya\'juj
and Ma\'juj like this,\" and he made a circle with his thumb and
forefinger. I said, \"O Messenger of Allah, will we be destroyed when
the righteous are among us?\" He said, \"Yes, if there is a lot of
wickedness.\" \[Agreed upon\]

190\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Beware of sitting in the roadways.\"
They said, \"Messenger of Allah. we must have places where we can sit
and talk together.\" The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"If you must sit there, then give the roadway
its rights.\" They asked, \"What are the rights of the roadway,
Messenger of Allah?\" He said, \"Lowering the eye, refraining from
causing annoyance, returning the greeting, commanding the right and
forbidding the wrong.\" \[Agreed upon\]

191\. Ibn \'Abbas said that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, saw a gold ring on the hand of a man and removed it
and threw it away saying, \"Would one of you go and get a coal from the
Fire and put it in his hand!\" After the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, had left, the man was told, \"Take your
ring and turn it into profit!\" He said, \"No, by Prophet, I will never
take something that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, threw away!\" \[Muslim\]

192\. Abu Sa\'id al-Hasan al-Basri reported that \'A\'idh ibn \'Amr
visited \'Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad and he said, \"My boy, I heard the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \'The
worst of shepherds is the harsh one. Beware lest you be one of them.\'
He said to him, \'Sit down. You are one of the remainder of the
Companions of Muhammad, may Allah bless him and grant him peace.\" He
said, \"Do they have a remainder? The remainder comes after them and
refers to other than them!\"

193\. Hudhayfa reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, said, \"By the One in whose hand my self is, you should
command the right and forbid the wrong, or else Allah is very likely to
send down on you retribution from Him. Then you will call on Him and He
will not answer you.\" \[Muslim\]

194\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The best jihad is a just word in the
presence of a tyrannical ruler.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

195\. Abu \'Abdullah Tariq ibn Shihab al-Bajali al-Ahmasi reported that
a man asked the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, after
he had put his feet in his stirrups, \"What jihad is the best?\" He
said, \"A true word in the presence of a tyrannical ruler.\"
\[an-Nasa\'i\]

196\. Ibn Mas\'ud reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The first failing to enter the Children
of Isra\'il was that a man would meet another man and say, \'O so and
so! Fear Allah and stop what you are doing. It is not lawful for you,\'
Then he would meet him again the following day and find him still doing
the same thing but that would not prevent him from eating, drinking and
sitting with him. When they did this, Allah caused the hearts of some of
them to be tainted by others. Then He said, *\"Those among the Tribe of
Israel who rejected were cursed on the tongue of Dawud and that of
\'Isa, son of Maryam. That is because they rebelled and overstepped the
limits. They would not restrain one another from any of the wrong things
that they did. How evil were the things they used to do! You see many of
them taking the unbelievers as their friends. What their lower selves
have advanced for them is evil indeed\"* to *\"deviators\"* (5:78-81)
Then he said, \"No, by Allah, you should command the right and forbid
the wrong and you should restrain the unjust and bend them to the truth
and confine them to the truth or Allah will cause the hearts of some of
you to be tainted by others. And then He will curse you as He cursed
them.\'\" (Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

These are the words in Abu Dawud, and the words in at-Tirmidhi are:
\"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said,
\'When the Children of Israel fell into acts of disobedience, their men
of knowledge forbade them, but they did not stop. Then they sat with
them in their assemblies and ate and drank with them, so Allah caused
the hearts of some of them to be tainted by others. Allah cursed them on
the tongue of Da\'ud and \'Isa ibn Maryam. That was for their
disobedience and overstepping the limits.\" The Messenger of Allah, who
had been reclining, sat up. Then he said, \"No, by the One who has my
soul in His hand, until they bend them to the truth completely!\"

197\. Abu Bakr as-Siddiq said, \"O people! You recite this verse, *\'O
you who believe! You are only responsible for yourselves. The misguided
cannot harm you as long as you are guided.\'* (W5:105; H5:104) I heard
the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say,
\'If people see an unjust person, and do not restrain him, Allah is very
likely to seize them with retribution from Him.\'\" \[Abu Dawud and
at-Tirmidhi\]

[]{#punish}**24. Chapter: On the harsh punishment of someone who
commands right or forbids wrong while his own actions contradict what he
says**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Do you order people to devoutness and forget
> yourselves, when you recite the Book? Will you not use your
> intellect?\" (*W2:43; W2:44) and the Almighty says, *\"O you who
> believe! Why do you say that what you do not do? It is deeply
> abhorrent to Allah that you should say what you do not do.\"* (61:2-3)
> The Almighty says, *\"I would clearly not want to go behind your backs
> and do something I have forbidden you to do.\"* (11:88)

198\. Abu Zayd Usama ibn Zayd ibn Haritha said, \"I heard the Messenger
of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \'A man will be
brought on the Day of Rising and thrown into the Fire and the intestines
of his belly will come out and he will be dragged round by them as the
donkey goes round the mill. The people of the Fire will gather round him
and say, \"So-and-so! What has happened to you? Did you not command the
right and forbid the wrong?\" He will say, \"Yes. I used to command the
right and forbid the wrong and then do it.\"\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

[]{#trust}**25. Chapter: On the command to deliver trusts**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Allah commands you to return to their owners
> the things you hold on trust,\"* (W4:57; H4:58) and the Almighty says,
> *\"We offered the Trust to the heavens, the earth and the mountains,
> but they refused to take it on and shrank from it. But man took it on.
> He is indeed wrongdoing and ignorant.\"* (33:72)

199\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"There are three signs of a hypocrite:
whenever he speaks, he lies; whenever he makes a promise, he breaks it;
and whenever he is trusted, he betrays his trust.\" \[Agreed upon\]

In one variant, \"Even if he fasts and prays and claims that he is a
Muslim.\"

200\. Hudhayfa ibn al-Yaman said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, related two hadiths to us. I have seen
one of them come about and am still waiting for the other. He related to
us that trustworthiness had descended into the hearts of men. Then the
Qur\'an descended and they knew it from the Qur\'an and they knew it
from the Sunna. Then he related that trustworthiness would be removed,
and he said, \'A man will go to sleep and trustworthiness will be taken
from his heart and its trace will remain like a small mark. Then he will
go to sleep and trustworthiness will be taken from his heart and its
trace will remain like a weal, as when an ember rolls onto his foot and
it blisters up and you see it raised up with nothing in it.\' Then he
took some pebbles and rolled them onto his foot. \'And people will
continue to trade but practically no one will fulfill his trust, to such
a point that it will be said, \"There is a trustworthy man among the
Banu so-and-so!\" and until it will be said of a man, \"How tough he is!
How elegant! How intelligent!\" when he does not have a mustard-grain of
belief in his heart.\' There was a time when I did not care who I did
business with. If he was a Muslim, his deen was sufficient assurance for
me, and if he was a Christian or a Jew, his guardian was sufficient
assurance for me. Today I only do business with so-and-so and so-and-so
among you.\" \[Agreed upon\]

201\. Hudhayfa and Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Allah, the Blessed and
Exalted, will gather the people together, and the believers will stand
until the Garden is brought near to them and then they will go to Adam,
may the blessings of Allah be upon him, and say, \'O our father, open up
the Garden for us!\' He will say, \'Were you brought out of the Garden
by anything but the error of your father! That is not in my power. Go to
Ibrahim, the Friend of Allah.\'\" He said, \"They will go to Ibrahim and
Ibrahim will say, \'That is not in my power. I was only a friend. That
degree is far beyond me. Go to Musa to whom Allah spoke directly.\' They
will go to Musa and he will say, \'That is not in my power. Go to \'Isa,
the Word of Allah and His Spirit.\' \'Isa will say, \'That is not in my
power.\' They will go to Muhammad, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, and he will stand and will be granted permission. Trust and
kinship will be released and will stand on either side of the Sirat,
right and left. The first of them will pass over like lightning.\" I
said, \"May my father and mother be your ransom, what is passing like
lightning?\" He said, \"Haven\'t you seen how it comes and goes in the
blink of an eye? Then they will pass like the wind, then pass like
birds. The strongest of men will be carried by their actions while their
Prophet will be on the Sirat, saying, \'O Lord, grant safety, grant
safety,\' until the actions of the slaves are no longer sufficient and a
man is brought who can only cross crawling. On the sides of the Sirat
there are hooks hanging which are commanded to catch hold of particular
people. Anyone who is scratched is safe but anyone who is hooked is in
the Fire.\' By the One in whose hand is the soul of Abu Hurayra, the
bottom of Jahannam is seventy years deep.\" \[Muslim\]

202\. Abu Khubayb \'Abdullah ibn az-Zubayr said, \"When az-Zubayr stood
awaiting the Battle of the Camel, he called me over and I went to his
side. He said, \'O my son, no one will be killed today except someone
wronging or someone wronged. I think that I will be killed today as one
of the wronged. One of my greatest concerns is my debts. Do you think
that any of our property will remain after out debts are settled?\' He
said, \'O my son! Sell our property and pay my debts!.\' Then he willed
a third, and a third of it was for his sons, i.e. the sons of \'Abdullah
ibn az-Zubayr. He said, \'A third of the third. If anything is left over
of our property after paying the debts, then a third of it is for your
children.\' (Hisham said, \"Some of the sons of \'Abdullah were the same
age as the sons of az-Zubayr: Khubayb and \'Abbad. At that time he had
nine sons and nine daughters.\")\" \'Abdullah said, \"My father began to
order me concerning his debt and say, \'O my son, if you are unable to
settle any of it, then ask my Master for help in doing it.\" He said,
\"By Allah, I did not know what he meant so I said, \'O my father, who
is your Master?\' He said, \'Allah.\'\" He said, \"Whenever I ran into a
difficulty regarding his debt I said, \'O Master of az-Zubayr! Pay his
debt for him!\' and He would settle it. Az-Zubayr, may Allah be pleased
with him, was killed without leaving a dinar or a dirham, but only two
pieces of land, one of which was al-Ghaba, and eleven houses in Madina,
two in Basra, one in Kufa, and one in Egypt.\" He said, \"The debt that
he owed resulted from people bringing him money to leave in his keeping.
Az-Zubayr would say, \'No, let it rather be a loan, for otherwise I fear
that it might get lost.\' He was never appointed to a government post of
any kind nor to the collection of land-tax (kharaj) nor anything else.
What he had came only from expeditions with the Prophet, or with Abu
Bakr, \'Umar and \'Uthman.\"

\'Abdullah ibn az-Zubayr said, \"When I worked out the debt he owed, I
found it to be two million and two hundred thousand.\" Hakim ibn Hizam
met \'Abdullah ibn az-Zubayr and said, \"Nephew, how large a debt does
my brother have?\" I concealed it and said, \"A hundred thousand.\"
Hakim said, \"By Allah, I do not think that your property will cover
this amount.\" \'Abdullah said, \"What would you think if it were two
million and two hundred thousand?\" He said, \"I do not think you will
be able to pay this. If you are unable to cover any of it, then ask me
for help.\"

He said, \"Az-Zubayr had purchased al-Ghaba for one hundred and seventy
thousand, and \'Abdullah sold it for one million and six hundred
thousand. Then he stood up and said, \'Anyone who is owed anything by
az-Zubayr should come to us at al-Ghaba.\' \'Abdullah ibn Ja\'far came
to him, and az-Zubayr owed him four hundred thousand. He said to
\'Abdullah. \'If you like, I will forgo it.\' \'Abdullah said, \'No.\'
He said, \'If you like, you can delay payment if you want to.\'
\'Abdullah said, \'No.\'\" He said, \"He said, \'So allocate me a piece
of land.\' \'Abdullah said, \'You can have from here to there.\'
\'Abdullah sold some of it and paid his debts in full and there remained
four and a half shares of the land. He went to Mu\'awiya while \'Amr ibn
\'Uthman, al-Mundhir ibn az-Zubayr and Ibn Zam\'a were with him.
Mu\'awiya said, \'How much have you valued al-Ghaba at?\' He said,
\'Each share at a hundred thousand.\' He said, \'How much remains?\' He
said, \'Four and half shares.\' Al-Mundhir ibn az-Zubayr said, \'I will
take a share for a hundred thousand.\' \'Amr ibn \'Uthman said, \'I will
take a share for a hundred thousand.\' Ibn Zam\'a said, \'I will take a
share for a hundred thousad.\' Mu\'awiya said, \'How much remains?\' He
said, \'A share and a half.\' He said, \'I will take them for one
hundred and fifty thousand.\'\"

He said, \"\'Abdullah ibn Ja\'far later sold his share to Mu\'awiya for
sixty thousand. When Ibn az-Zubayr finishing settling his debts, the
sons of az-Zubayr said, \'Distribute our inheritance between us.\' He
said, \'No, by Allah, I will not distribute it until I have made this
announcement for four years during the hajj festival: \'Anyone who has a
debt owed him by az-Zubayr should come to us and we will settle it.\'\"
He said, \"He announced that every year at the festival and when the
four years were up, he distributed it between them. Az-Zubayr had four
wives and after the prescribed third was removed, each wife got a
million and two hundred thousand. So the total amount of his property
was fifty million and two hundred thousand.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

[]{#injustice}**26. Chapter: On injustice and the command to make
restitution in cases of injustice**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Nor intercessor will the wrongdoers have, who
> could be listened to,\"* (40:18) and the Almighty says, *\"For those
> that do wrong there is no helper.\"* (22:71)

203\. Jabir reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Beware of injustice. Injustice will be
darkness on the Day of Rising. Beware of avarice. Avarice destroyed
those before you and prompted them to shed each other\'s blood and make
lawful what was unlawful.\" \[Muslim\]

204\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Rights will be given to those to whom
they are owed on the Day of Rising until even the hornless sheep will
have retaliation from the horned sheep.\" \[Muslim\]

205\. Ibn \'Umar said, \"We used to talk about the Farewell Hajj while
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, was still among us
and we did not know what the Farewell Hajj was. The Messenger of Allah
praised and lauded Allah and then mentioned the Dajjal, talking of him
at length. He said, \'There has been no Prophet sent who did not warn
his people about him. Nuh warned his people about him, and so did all
the Prophets after him. If he emerges among you, he will not be hidden
from you. It is not hidden from you that your Lord is not one-eyed, but
the Dajjal is one-eyed, his right eye looking like a swollen black
grape. Allah has made your blood and your property sacred between you
like the sacredness of this day of yours in this land of yours in this
month of yours. Have I not conveyed it? \' They said, \'Yes.\' He said,
\'O Allah, bear witness!\' three times. \'Woe to you! (or \'Bother you!)
Look and do not revert to being unbelievers after I have gone, striking
one another\'s necks.\'\" \[al-Bukhari. Muslim related part of it.\]

206\. \'A\'isha reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"If anyone wrongs someone else even to
the extent of a piece of land measuring a hand\'s width, his neck will
be encircled with it from the the seven earths.\" \[Agreed upon\]

207\. Abu Musa reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Allah prolongs the life of the unjust but
when He takes them, He will not let them escape. Then he recited,
*\'Such is the iron grip of your Lord when He seizes cities which do
wrong. His grip is painful, violent.\'* (11:102)\" \[Agreed upon\]

208\. Mu\'adh said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, sent me and said, \'You are going to a people who have
a Book. Call on them to testify that there is no god but Allah and that
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. If they obey you in respect of that,
then tell them that Allah has made the five prayers obligatory for them
every day. If they obey you in respect of that, inform them that Allah
has made it obligatory for zakat to be taken from their wealthy and
given to their poor. If they obey you in respect of that, beware of
taking the things people value highly and beware of the supplication of
the wronged man. There is no screen between him and Allah.\'\" \[Agreed
upon\]

209\. Abu Humayd \'Abdu\'r-Rahman ibn Sa\'d as-Sa\'idi said, \"The
Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, appointed a man from
al-Azd, called Ibn Al-Lutiyya to collect the zakat. When he arrived
back, he said, \'This is for you and this was given as a gift to me.\'
The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, stood
on the minbar, praised and glorified Allah and then said, \'I appointed
one of your men to be in charge of an activity for which Allah has made
me responsible, and then he came and said, \"This is for you and this
was given as a gift to me.\" Why did he not sit in the house of his
father or mother until his gift came to him if he is speaking the truth.
By Allah, none of you will take anything without right but that he will
meet Allah Almighty carrying it on the Day of Rising. I do not know if
any of you will meet Allah carrying a camel which is grumbling, or a cow
which is mooing, or a sheep which is bleating.\' Then he raised his
hands until the whites of his armpits could be seen, and said, \'O
Allah! Have I conveyed it?\' three times.\" \[Agreed upon\]

210\. Abu Hurayra, reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Whoever has done an injustice to his brother
with regard to his honour or anything else should seek to be absolved by
him before the day when there will be neither dinar nor dirham. If he
has right actions, they will be taken from him to counterbalance the
injustice he did, and if he does not have any good actions, some of the
bad actions of his friend will be taken and he will be made to carry
them.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

211\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr ibn al-\'As reported that the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"A Muslim is someone from
whose tongue and hand the Muslims are safe. An emigrant (*muhajir*) is
someone who leaves behind what Allah has forbidden.\" \[Agreed upon\]

212\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr ibn al-\'As said, \"There was a man called
Kirkara who used to look after the family and goods of the Prophet. He
died and the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said, \'He is in the Fire.\' They went to look and found a cloak
that he had stolen.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

213\. Abu Bakr Nufay\' ibn al-Harith reported that the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Time has continued
cyclically in the same way since the day Allah created the heavens and
the earth. The year is twelve months, four of which are sacred. Three
are consecutive: Dhu\'l-Qa\'da, Dhu\'l-Hijja and al-Muharram, and there
is Rajab of Mudar which is between Jumada and Sha\'ban. He said, \"What
month is this?\" We were silent, thinking that he might change its name.
He said, \"Is this not Dhu\'l-Hijja?\" We said, \"Yes.\" Then he said,
\"And what land is this?\" and we were silent, thinking that he might
change its name. He said, \"Is this not the sacred land?\" We said,
\"Yes.\' \"What day is this?\" We were silent, thinking that he might
change its name. He said, \"Is this not the Day of Sacrifice?\" We said,
\"Indeed.\" He said, \"Your blood, your property and your honour are
sacred to you, like the sacredness of this day in this month in this
city. You will meet your Lord and He will ask you about your actions. So
do not revert to being unbelievers after I have gone, striking one
another\'s necks. Let the one who is present convey to the one who is
absent. Perhaps the one to whom it is conveyed will retain it better
those who are present.\" Then he said, \"Have I not conveyed it? Have I
not conveyed it?\" We said, \"Yes.\" He said, \"O Allah, bear witness.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

214\. Abu Umama Iyas ibn Tha\'laba al-Harithi reported the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Allah has made
the Fire mandatory for anyone who usurps the right of another Muslim by
an oath and has forbidden him the Garden.\" A man said, \"Even if it is
only something little, Messenger of Allah?\" He said, \"Even if it is
only a stick of arak.\" \[Muslim\]

215\. \'Adi ibn \'Umayra said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \'Anyone among you we put in
charge of something who then conceals a needle, or anything larger, from
us, that is misappropriation which he will have to account for on the
Day of Rising.\' A black man of the Ansar stood up and went to him - it
is as if I could still see him - and said, \'Messenger of Allah, take
back your appointment from me.\' He said, \'What is up?\' He said, \'I
heard you saying such-and-such.\' He said, \'I say it again: anyone we
put in charge of something, should bring all of it, whether small or
large. He should take what is given him and leave what is forbidden
him.\'\" \[Muslim\]

216\. \'Umar ibn al-Khattab said, \"On the day of Khaybar, a group of
the Companions of the Prophet came forward and said, \'So-and-so has
been martyred and so-and-so has been martyred,\' until they passed by a
man and said of him, \'So-and-so has been martyred.\' The Prophet, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \'No, I have seen him in the
Fire in a cloak - or a mantle - which he misappropriated from the
booty.\'\" \[Muslim\]

217\. Abu Qatada al-Harith ibn Rib\'i reported that the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, stood up among them and
mentioned to them that that jihad in the way of Allah and belief in
Allah are the best of actions. A man stood up and said, \"Messenger of
Allah, tell me, if I am killed in the way of Allah, will my sins be
absolved?\" The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said, \"Yes, if you are killed in the way of Allah and you are
steadfast, expecting the reward, advancing and not retreating.\" Then
the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said,
\"What did you say?\" He said, \"Tell me, if I am killed in the way of
Allah, will my sins be absolved?\" He said, \"Yes, if you are killed in
the way of Allah and you are steadfast, expecting the reward, advancing
and not retreating - except for the debt. Jibril just said that to me.\"
\[Muslim\]

218\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Do you know who is really destitute?\"
They said, \"The destitute among us are those who have no money or
property.\" He said, \"The truly destitute person among my community is
someone who comes on the Day of Rising with prayer, fasting and zakat,
but having insulted this person and slandered that person and consumed
the property of this person and shed the blood of that person and beaten
that person. He will give this person some of his good deeds and that
one some of his good deeds. If his good deeds are wiped out before he
has paid what he owes, some of their wrong actions are taken and thrown
on him and then he is thrown into the Fire.\" \[Muslim\]

219\. Umm Salama reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"I am a human being and you bring your
disputes to me. It may be that one of you is more eloquent in stating
his case than another and so I give judgement in his favour according to
what I hear. If I award him judgement at the expense of the right of his
brother, I am cutting out a piece of the Fire for him.\" \[Agreed upon\]

220\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"A believer will remain within the
bounds of his religion as long as he does not spill blood unlawfully.\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

221\. Khawla bint \'Amir al-Ansariyya, the wife of Hamza, said, \"I
heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
say, \'Men who spend out the property of Allah without due right will go
to the Fire on the Day of Rising.\"\[al-Bukhari\]

[]{#sacred}**27. Chapter: On respecting the sacred things of the
Muslims, clarification of their rights and having compassion and mercy
for them**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"If someone honours Allah\'s sacred things,
> that is better for him his Lord\'s sight,\"* (22:30) and the Almighty
> says, *\"As for those who honour Allah\'s sacred rites, that comes
> from taqwa in their hearts.\"* (22:32) The Almighty says, *\"And take
> the believers under your wing,\"* (15:88) and the Almighty says, *\"If
> someone kills another person - unless it is in retaliation for someone
> else or for causing corruption in the earth - it is as if he had
> murdered all mankind. And if anyone gives life to another person, it
> is as if he had given life to all mankind.\"* (5:32)

222\. Abu Musa reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"A believer in respect of another believer
is like a building whose parts support one another.\" and he intertwined
his fingers. \[Agreed upon\]

223\. He also reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone passing through any of our mosques
or markets carrying arrows should hold or grasp them by their heads so
that no Muslim will be injured by them.\" \[Agreed upon\]

224\. An-Nu\'man ibn Bashir reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"The metaphor of the
believers in their mutual love, mercy and affection is that of the body.
When one limb of it complains, the rest of the body collapses with
sleeplessness and fever.\" \[Agreed upon\]

225\. Abu Hurayra said, \"The Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, kissed al-Hasan ibn \'Ali while al-Aqra\' ibn Habis was with him.
Al-Aqra\' said, \'I have ten children and have never kissed any of
them.\' The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
looked at him and said, \'Anyone who does not show mercy will not be
shown mercy.\" \[Agreed upon\]

226\. \'A\'isha said, \"Some of the Bedouins came to the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, and said, \'Do you
really kiss your children?\' He said, \'Yes.\' They said, \'But, by
Allah, we do not!\' The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \'There is nothing I can do if Allah has removed
mercy from your hearts!\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

227\. Jarir ibn \'Abdullah reported that the Messenger of Allah said,
\"If someone does not show mercy to people, Allah will not show mercy to
him.\" \[Agreed upon\]

228\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"When any of you lead other people in
prayer, you should make it short, for among you are there are weak, sick
and old people. When you pray by yourself, you can make it as long as
you wish.\" \[Agreed upon\]

One version has, \"And those who have a need to attend to.\"

229\. \'A\'isha said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to sometimes stop doing an action, in spite of it
being something he loved to do, out of the fear that other people might
do it and it would become obligatory for them.\" \[Agreed upon\]

230\. \'A\'isha said, \"The Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, forbade continuous fasting as a mercy to people. They said, \'But
you fast continously.\' He said, \'My state is not like yours. My Lord
feeds me and gives me to drink.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

It means, \"He gave me the strength of one who eats and drinks.\"

231\. Abu Qatada al-Harith ibn Rib\'i reported that the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"I stand in prayer and would
like to make it long but I hear the crying of a child and shorten my
prayer not wanting to make things difficult for its mother.\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

232\. Jundub ibn \'Abdullah reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who prays the Subh
prayer is in Allah\'s keeping. Make sure Allah does not ask you for
anything that is in His keeping. When He asks someone for something that
is in His keeping, He will get hold of him and then throw him head first
into the Fire of Jahannam.\" \[Muslim\]

233\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"A Muslim is the brother of another
Muslim. He should not wrong him nor surrender him to his enemy. Allah
will take care of the needs of anyone who takes care of the needs of his
brother. On the Day of Rising Allah will dispel the anxiety of anyone
who dispels the anxiety of another Muslim. On the Day of Rising Allah
will veil anyone who veils another Muslim.\" \[Agreed upon\]

234\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"A Muslim is the brother of another
Muslim. He should not alarm him nor lie to him, nor disappoint him. The
honour, property and blood of every Muslim is unlawful to another
Muslim. Great care should be taken on this point for it is enough evil
for a man merely to scorn his Muslim brother.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

235\. He reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Do not envy one another, do not bid against on
another, bidding in order to raise the price, do not hate one another,
do not turn your backs on one another, and none of you should sell
against the sale of anyone else. Be slaves of Allah, brothers. A Muslim
is the brother of another Muslim: he should not wrong him nor scorn him
nor disappoint him. Godfearing is here,\" and he pointed to his breast
three times. \"It is enough evil for man to scorn his Muslim brother.
The blood, property and honour of a Muslim is unlawful to another
Muslim.\" \[Muslim\]

236\. Anas reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said, \"None of you can truly be said to believe until he wants
for his brother what he wants for himself.\" \[Agreed upon\]

237\. He also reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Help your brother, wronging or wronged.\" A
man said, \"Messenger of Allah, I can help him if he is wronged but tell
me how I can help him if he is wronging?\" He said, \"You can restrain
him - or prevent him - from injustice. That is helping him.\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

238\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The rights one Muslim has over another
Muslim are five: returning the greeting, visiting the sick, joining
funeral processions, accepting invitations and blessing those who
sneeze.\" \[Agreed upon\]

In the variant of Muslim, \"The Muslim has six rights. When you meet
him, you should greet him. When he invites you, you should accept his
invitation. When he asks you for counsel, you should counsel him. When
he sneezes and praises Allah, you should bless him. When he is ill, you
should visit him. When he dies, you should follow him.\"

239\. Abu \'Umara al-Bara\' ibn \'Azib said, \"The Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, instructed us to do seven things and
forbade us seven. He instructed us to visit the sick, to join funeral
processions, to bless people who sneeze, to fulfil our oaths, to help
the wronged, to accept invitations, and to return the greeting. He
forbade us gold rings, drinking from silver vessels, red silk, fine
silk, mixed silk and cotton, and wearing silk and istibraq silk, and
brocade.\" \[Agreed upon\]

One variant has \"declaring stray animals\" among the first seven.

[]{#veil}**28. Chapter: Veiling the faults of Muslims and the
prohibition against divulging them without necessity**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"People who love to see filth being spread
> abour concerning the believers will have a painful punishment both in
> this life and in the Next World.\"* (24:19)

240\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"No slave veils another slave in this world
without Allah veiling him on the Day of Rising.\" \[Muslim\]

241\. Abu Hurayra said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, say, \'All of my community will be given safety
except for those who flaunt themselves. An aspect of flaunting yourself
is to do an action by night and then in the morning, when Allah has
veiled you, to say, \"O so-and-so! I did such-and-such yesterday,\"
removing Allah\'s veil in the morning after your Lord has veiled you in
the night.\'\" \[Agreed upon}

242\. Abu Hurayra said, \"When a female slave commits fornication and
her fornication is proven, then a man should flog her and not blame her.
If she commits fornication again, he should flog her and not blame her.
If she commits fornication a third time, he should sell her, even for a
rope made of hair.\"\[Agreed upon\]

243\. Abu Hurayra said, \"A man who had drunk wine was brought before
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace. \'Beat him,\' he
ordered.\" Abu Hurayra continued, \"Some of us beat with our hands, some
with our sandals and some with our garments. When he left, one of the
people said, \'May Allah disgrace you!\' He said, \'Do not say that. Do
not help shaytan against him.\'\" \[al-Bukhari\]

[]{#needs}**29. Chapter: Taking care of the needs of the Muslims**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Do good so that hopefully you will be
> successful.\"* (W22:76; H22:77)

244\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The Muslim is the brother of the
Muslim. He should not wrong him nor surrender him to his enemy. Allah
will take care of the needs of anyone who takes care of the needs of his
brother. On the Day of Rising Allah will dispel the anxiety of anyone
who dispels the anxiety of another Muslim. On the Day of Rising Allah
will veil anyone who veils another Muslim.\" \[Agreed upon\]

245\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Allah will relieve anyone who relieves a
believer of one of the afflictions of this world, of one of the
afflictions of the Day of Rising. Allah will give ease in this world and
the Next to anyone who eases the hardship of another. Allah will veil
anyone who veils another Muslim in this world and the Next. Allah will
help His slave as long as His slave is helping his brother.\" \[Muslim\]

[]{#intercession}**30. Chapter: Intercession**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Those who join forces for good will receive a
> reward for it.\"* (W4:84; H4:85)

246\. Abu Musa al-Ash\'ari said, \"When someone with a need came to the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, he turned to those
sitting with him and said, \'Intercede on behalf of others and you will
get the reward. Allah achieves what He likes on the tongue of His
Prophet.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

One variant has \"what He will\"

247\. Ibn \'Abbas said in the story of Barira and her husband, \"The
Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, asked her, \'Will you
take him back?\' She said, \'Do you command me to, Messenger of Allah?\'
He replied, \'I am interceding.\' She said, \'I have no need of him.\'\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

[]{#right}**31. Chapter: On Putting things right between people**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"There is no good in much of their secret talk,
> except in the case of those who enjoin sadaqa, or what is right, or
> putting things right between people,\"* (W4:113; H4:114) and the
> Almighty says, *\"Reconciliation is better.\"* (W4:127l H4:128) The
> Almighty says*, \"So have taqwa of Allah and put things right between
> you,\"* (8:1) and the Almighty says, *\"The believers are brothers, so
> make peace between your brothers.\"* (49:10)

248\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"There is *sadaqa* owed by every joint
people have every day on which the sun rises. Putting things right
between two people is *sadaqa*. Helping a man with his mount and helping
him up onto it or lifting up his baggage onto it is *sadaqa*. A good
word is *sadaqa*. Every step you take to the prayer is *sadaqa*.
Removing an obstruction from the road is *sadaqa*.\" \[Agreed upon\]

249\. Umm Kulthum bint \'Uqba ibn Abi Mu\'ayt said, \"I heard the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say,
\'Someone who puts things right between people and promotes good or says
good cannot be called a liar.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

It adds in the variant of Muslim, she said, \"I did not hear him make an
allowance regarding anything that people said except for three things:
war, putting things right between people, and a man speaking to his wife
and a wife speaking to her husband.\"

250\. \'A\'isha said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, heard the sound of people quarrelling at the door with
raised voices. One of them was asking the other to reduce his debt and
to show him a little leniency. He said, \'By Allah, I will not do it.\'
The Messenger of Allah went out to them and said, \'Where is the one who
swore by Allah that he would not do what is good?\' He said, \"It was I,
Messenger of Allah. He can have whatever he likes.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

251\. Abu\'l-\'Abbas Sahl ibn Sa\'d as-Sa\'idi said, \"The Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, heard that there was
some disagreement among the Banu \'Amr ibn \'Awf at Quba\'. The
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, went out
with some of the people to make peace between them. The Messenger of
Allah was delayed and it became time for the prayer. Bilal went to Abu
Bakr and said, \'Abu Bakr, the Messenger of Allah is delayed and it is
time for the prayer. Can you lead the people?\' He said, \'Yes, if you
wish.\' Bilal called the iqama for the prayer and Abu Bakr went forward
and said the takbir for the people. The Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, came walking through the rows until he
was standing in the first row and the people started to clap. Abu Bakr
was not someone who used to look around in the prayer but when the
people increased their clapping, he did turn around and there was the
Messenger of Allah. The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, indicated to him to carry on praying but Abu Bakr
raised his hands and praised Allah and then stepped backwards so that he
was standing in the row and the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, went forward and led the people in prayer. When he
finished the prayer, he faced the people and said, \'O people, why, when
something happened to you in the prayer, did you begin to clap? Clapping
is for women. When something happens to you in the prayer, you should
say, \"Glory be to Allah!\" There is no one who will not turn round when
they hear the words \"Glory be to Allah\". Abu Bakr, what kept you from
continuing to lead the people in prayer when I indicated to you to do
it?\' Abu Bakr said, \'It is not correct that Ibn Abi Quhafa should lead
the people in prayer in front of the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

[]{#weak}**32. Chapter: On the excellence of the weak, poor and obscure
Muslims**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Restrain yourself with those who call on their
> Lord morning and evening, seeking His Face, and let not thine eyes
> pass beyond them.\"* (18:28)

252\. Haritha ibn Wahb said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \"Shall I inform you about the
people of the Garden? All who are weak and thought to be weak. If they
were to take an oath by Allah, Allah would carry it out Shall I tell you
about the people of the Fire? All those who are coarse, domineering, and
arrogant.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

253\. Abu\'l-\'Abbas Sahl ibn Sa\'d as-Sa\'idi said, \"A man passed by
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, who said to the
man who was sitting with him, \'What do you think of this one?\' He
replied, \'A man who is one of our nobles. This man, by Allah, if he
proposes marriage, his proposal is accepting, and if he intercedes his
intercession would be granted.\' The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, was silent. Then another man passed by and the
Messenger of Allah asked him, \'What do you think of this one?\' He
answered, \'O Messenger of Allah, this is just one of the poor Muslims.
If he were to propose marriage, his proposal would not be worth
accepting, and if he were to intercede, his intercession would not be
granted, and if he were to speak, his words would not be listened to.\'
The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said,
\'This one is better than the whole earth full of the first one.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

254\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The Garden and the Fire had an
argument. The Fire said, \'I contain the arrogant and the proud,\' and
the Garden said, \'I contain the weak and the poor.\' So Allah decided
between them, \'You, the Garden, are My mercy. I show mercy through you
to whomever I wish. You, the Fire, are My punishment. I punish by you
whomever I wish. Both of you will be filled by Me.\'\" \[Muslim\]

255\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"On the Day of Rising, a great, hefty
man will be brought forward who is not worth the weight of a gnat\'s
wing in the sight of Allah.\" \[Agreed upon\]

256\. Abu Hurayra also reported that a black woman or youth used to
sweep the mosque. The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, missed her and asked after her or him. They said, \"She
died.\" He said, \"Why did you not inform me?\" It was as if they
thought little of her or him. He said, \"Show me the grave.\" They
directed him to it and he prayed over it. Then he said, \"These graves
are filled with darkness surrounding their inhabitants. Allah Almighty
illuminates them for them by my praying over them.\" \[Agreed upon\]

257\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"There is many an unkempt person, driven
away from doors, but if he were to swear an oath by Allah, He would
fulfil it.\" \[Muslim\]

258\. Usama reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said, \"I stood at the entrance to the Garden and most of the
people who entered it were the poor whereas the people of wealth were
held back. The people of the Fire were ordered to the Fire, and I stood
at the entrance to the Fire and most of those who entered it were
women.\" \[Agreed upon\]

259\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Only three people talked in their cradles:
\'Isa son of Maryam and the companion of Jurayj. Jurayj was a man of
assiduous worship who went to live in a hermitage. While he was there,
his mother came while he was praying and said, \'Jurayj!\' He said, \'O
Lord, my mother or my prayer!\' He continued in his prayer and she went
away. The next day she came while he was praying and she said,
\'Jurayj!\' He again said, \'O Lord, my mother or my prayer!\' He
continued in his prayer and she went away. The next day she came while
he was praying and she said, \'Jurayj!\' He said, \'O Lord, my mother or
my prayer!\' He continued in his prayer.She said, \'O Allah, do not let
him die without having looked into the face of a prostitute!\' Jurayj
and his worship became a subject of discussion among the Children of
Israel and among them was a wanton woman whose beauty was proverbial.
She said, \'If you like, I will seduce him.\' She displayed herself to
him, but he did not look at her. She went to a shepherd who had taken
shelter in his hermitage and offered herself to him. He had intercourse
with her and she became pregnant. When she gave birth, she said, \'It is
from Jurayj.\' They went to him and forced him down from his hermitage,
demolished it, and began to beat him. He said, \'What is wrong with
you?\' They said, \'You committed fornication with this prostitute and
she has given birth to your child.\' He said, \'Where is the child?\'
They brought him and he said, \'Let me pray first.\' He prayed and when
he had finished, the child was brought and put in his lap. He said,
\'Boy, who is your father?\' The boy said, \'So-and-so the shepherd.\'
They began to kiss Jurayj and stroke him. They said, \'We will build you
a hermitage of gold.\' He said, \'No, rebuild it from clay as it was
before.\' They did this.

\"While a child was feeding from its mother, a man of good appearance
passed by riding a fast mount. She said, \'O Allah, make my son like
this man.\' He left the breast and turned to look at him and said, \'O
Allah, do not make me like him.\' Then he turned back to the breast and
began to feed.\" It is as if I could see the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, describing his feeding by putting
his forefinger in his house and sucking it. He said, \"Then they brought
along a slavegirl and were beating her, saying, \'You committed
fornication and stole.\' She was saying, \'Allah is enough for me and
the best guardian!\' His mother said, \'O Allah, do not make my son like
her!\' He stopped feeding and looked at her and said, \'O Allah, make me
like her.\' They began to talk together and she said, \'A man of
handsome appearance passed by and I said, \'\"O Allah, make my son like
him!\" and you said, \"O Allah, do not make me like him.\" Then they
brought this slavegirl whom they were beating, saying, \"You committed
fornication and stole.\" I said, \"O Allah, do not make my son like
her!\" and you said, \"O Allah, make me like her.\"\' He said, \'That
man was a tyrant, so I said, \"O Allah, do not make me like him!\" They
said to this woman, \"You committed adultery\" when she had not, and
\"you stole\" when she had not stolen, so I said, \"O Allah, make me
like her.\"\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

[]{#orphans}**33. Chapter: Kindness to orphans, girls, the weak, the
very poor, and the downtrodden. Treating them well, compassion towards
them, humility with them, and gentleness towards them**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"And take the believers under your wing,\"*
> (15:88) and the Almighty says, *\"Restrain yourself patiently with
> those who call on their Lord morning and evening, desiring His Face.
> Do not turn your eyes from them.\"* (18:28) The Almighty says*, \"So
> as for the orphans, do not oppress them, and as for beggars, do not
> berate them,\"* (93:9-10) and the Almighty says, *\"Have you seen him
> who denies the deen? He is the one who harshly rebuffs the orphan and
> does not urge the feeding of the poor.\"* (107:1-3)

260\. Sa\'d ibn Abi Waqqas said, \"We were once with the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, in a group of six. The idolaters
told to the Prophet, \'Send these men away so that they do not become
impudent towards us.\' There was me, Ibn Mas\'ud, a man of Hudhayl,
Bilal and two other men I will not name. There occurred within the soul
of the Messenger of Allah whatever Allah wished to occur and he spoke to
himself. So Allah Almighty sent down*, \'Do not chase away those who
call on their Lord morning and evening, seeking His Face.*\' (W6:53;
H6:52)\" \[Muslim\]

261\. Abu Hubayra \'A\'idh ibn \'Amr al-Muzani, one of the people
present at the Bay\'at ar-Ridwan, reported that Abu Sufyan came to
Salman, Suhayb and Bilal in a group and they said, \"The swords of Allah
have not finished off the enemy of Allah!\" Abu Bakr said, \"Do you say
this to a shaykh and master of Quraysh?\" He went to the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, and told him. He said, \"Abu Bakr,
perhaps you have made them angry? If you were to make them angry, then
you would make your Lord angry.\" He went to them and said, \"Brothers,
have I made you angry?\" They said, \"No, may Allah forgive you,
brother.\" \[Muslim\]

262\. Sahl ibn Sa\'d reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"I and those who care for orphans
will be in the Garden like this,\" and he pointed with his forefinger
and middle finger and made an opening between them.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

263\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"I and an orphan\'s guardian, whether he
is a relative or a non-relative, will be like these two in the Garden,\"
and the transmitter, Malik ibn Anas, indicated the index and middle
fingers. \[Muslim\]

264\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The very poor man is not the one who is
turned away by a date or two, or for a bite or two, but the very poor is
the one who does not ask.\". \[Agreed upon\]

In a variant in the two Sahih collections, \"The very poor man is not
the one who goes around to people to ask for a bite or two to eat or a
date or two, but the one who does not have enough for himself but is too
shy to ask so that he is given sadaqa - or does not beg from people
importunately.\"

265\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"\'Someone who strives on behalf of widows and
the poor is like someone who fights in the way of Allah.\' I think that
he also said, \'And like someone who continually stands at night in
prayer and like someone who continually fasts.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

266\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"The worst food is the food of a wedding feast
which is denied to those who come to it and which those who are invited
to it refuse to attend. Anyone who does not respond to an invitation has
rebelled against Allah and His Messenger.\" \[Muslim\]

In a variant in the two *Sahih* collections from Abu Hurayra are the
words, \"The worst food is the food of a wedding feast to which the rich
are invited and from which the poor are left out.\"

267\. Anas reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said, \"I and anyone who brings up two girls until they come of
age will be like these two on the Day of Rising,\" and he put his
fingers together. \[Muslim\]

268\. \'A\'isha said, \"A woman came to me with her two daughters to beg
but I had nothing but a date which I gave to her. She divided it between
her two daughters, not eating any of it herself. Then she got up and
left. The Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, came in to
us and I told him about this and he said, \'Anyone who is tried in any
way on account of his daughters will find them to be a shield for him
from the Fire.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

269\. \'A\'isha said, \"A poor woman came carrying two of her daughters
and I gave her three dates. She gave each of them a date and lifted the
other date to her mouth to eat it and then her daughters asked to eat
it, so she divided between them the date which she was going to eat. I
was astonished at what she did and I mentioned what she had done to the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace. He said,
\'Allah has made the Garden mandatory for her because of it - or freed
her from the Fire because of it.\'\" \[Muslim\]

270\. Abu Shurayh Khuwaylid ibn \'Amr al-Khuza\'i said, \"The Messenger
of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \'O Allah! I
consider it a wrong action that the rights of two weak ones be violated:
orphans and women.\" \[an-Nasa\'i\]

271\. Mus\'ab ibn Sa\'d ibn Abi Waqqas said, \"Sa\'d thought that he had
preference over those below him and the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \'Are you given victory and provision except on
account of the weak among you?\'\" \[al-Bukhari\]

272\. Abu\'d-Darda\' \'Umaymir said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \'Help me in seeking out
the weak. They are supported. You are provided for on account of the
weak among you.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

[]{#women}**34. Chapter: Treating women well**

> *Allah Almighty says, \"Live together with them correctly and
> courteously,\"* (4:19) and the Almighty says, \"*You will not be able
> to be completely fair between your wives, however hard you try. But do
> not be completely partial so as to leave a wife, as it were, suspended
> in mid-air. And if you make amends and have taqwa, Allah is
> Ever-Forgiving, Most Merciful.\"* (W4:128; H4:129)

273\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Treat women well. Woman was created
from a rib. The most crooked part of the rib is the top part. If you try
to straighten it, you will break it. If you leave it, it remains
crooked. So treat women well.\" \[Agreed upon\]

In a variant in the two *Sahih* collections, \"A woman is like a rib. If
you straighten it, you break it. If you wish to benefit from her, you
can benefit from her in spite of her crookedness.\"

In a variant in Muslim, \"Woman was created from a rib, and you will
never find any means to straighten her. If you wish to benefit from her,
you can benefit from her in spite of her crookedness. If you try to
straighten her, you will break her, and breaking her means divorcing
her.\"

274\. \'Abdullah ibn Zam\'a reported that he heard the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, giving a speech in which mentioned
the She-camel and the one who hamstrung her. The Messenger of Allah
said, *\"\'The worst of them rushed ahead,*\' (91:12) means that a
mighty, malicious, powerful man in his party leapt to do it.\" Then he
mentioned women and gave an admonishment regarding them, saying, \"Some
of you go and flog their wives as a slave is flogged and then sleep with
them at the end of the day.\" Then he admonished them about their
laughing at people breaking wind and said, \"Why does one of you laugh
at something he himself does?\" \[Agreed upon\]

275\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"A believing man should not hate a
believing woman. If he dislikes something in her character, he should be
pleased with some other ­ or another­ trait of hers.\" \[Muslim\]

276\. \'Amr ibn al-Ahwas al-Jushami reported that he heard the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say during the Farewell Hajj
after praising and glorifying Allah, and reminding and admonishing,
\"Treat your women well. They are as captives in your possession. You
have no rights over them except that \[i.e. physical enjoyment and that
they protect their husband\'s interest in respect of themselves and his
property\]. If they act licentiously in an open way, then leave them
alone in their beds and beat them but not severely. If they obey you,
you have no way against them. You have rights over your women and your
women have rights over you. Your right over them is that they do not
allow into your bed those you dislike and do not permit those you
dislike to enter your house. Their right over you is that you are good
to them in respect of their clothes and food.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

277\. Mu\'awiya ibn Hayda said, \"I asked, \'Messenger of Allah, what is
the right of someone\'s wife over him?\' He said, \'That you feed her
when you eat and clothe her when you clothe yourself and do not strike
her face. Do not malign her and do not keep apart from her, except in
the house.\'\" \[Abu Dawud\]

278\. Abu Hurayra stated, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \'The most perfect of believers in belief is
the best of them in character. The best of you are those who are the
best to their women.\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

279\. Iyas ibn \'Abdullah ibn Abi Dhubab reported that the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Do not beat the
female slaves of Allah.\" Then \'Umar came to the Prophet and said,
\"The women have become bold towards their husbands,\" and so he made an
allowance to beat them. Then many women surrounded the family of the
Messenger of Allah to complain about their husbands. The Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"The people of
the household of Muhammad have surrounded by many women who are
complaining about their husbands. Those men are not among the best of
you.\"

280\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr ibn al-\'As reported that the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"This world is
enjoyment, and the best of its enjoyment is a righteous woman.\"

[]{#rights}**35. Chapter: On the rights of a husband from his wife**

> Allah Almighty says*, \"Men have charge of women because Allah has
> preferred the one above the other and because they spend their wealth
> on them. Right-acting women are obedient, safeguarding their
> husband\'s interests in his absence as Allah has guarded them.\"*
> (4:34)

281\. Abu Hurayra said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \'When a man calls his wife to bed and she
does not come and he spends the night angry with her, the angels curse
her until morning.\'\"

In a variant they both have, \"When a woman spends the night spurning
her husband\'s bed, the angels curse her until morning.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

In one variant, the Messenger of Allah said, \"By the One in whose hand
my soul is, there is no man who calls his wife to his bed and she
refuses to come without the One in the heaven being angry with her until
until her husband is pleased with her again.\"

282\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"It is not lawful for a woman to fast
while her husband is present, except with his permission, nor to give
someone permission to enter his house without his permission.\" \[Agreed
upon. This is the version in al-Bukhari\]

283\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"All of you are shepherds. Each of you is
responsible for his flock. An amir is a shepherd. A man is a shepherd in
respect of his family. The woman is a shepherd in respect of her
husband\'s house and children. All of you are shepherds and each of you
is reponsible for his flock.\" \[Agreed upon\]

284\. Abu \'Ali Talq ibn \'Ali reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"When a man calls his wife
to attend to his need, she should come to him, even if she is at the
oven.\" \[at-Tirmidhi and an-Nasa\'i\]

285\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"If I were to command anyone to prostrate to
anyone else, I would have commanded women to prostrate to their
husbands.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

286\. Umm Salama reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Any woman who dies at a time when her
husband is pleased with her will enter the Garden.\"\"

287\. Mu\'adh ibn Jabal reported is that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"A woman does not injure her husband in
this world without his wife among the houris saying, \'Do not injure
him, may Allah fight you! He is a guest with you who is about to leave
you for us.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

288\. Usama ibn Zayd reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"I have not left after me any temptation more
harmful to men than women.\" \[Agreed upon\]

[]{#family}**36. Chapter: Spending on one\'s family**

> Allah says, *\"It is the duty of the fathers to feed and clothe them
> with correctness and courtesy,\"* (W2:230; H2:233) and the Almighty
> says*, \"He who has plenty should spend out from his plenty, but he
> whose provision is restricted should spend from what Allah has given
> him. Allah does not demand from any self more than He has given it,\"*
> (65:7) and the Almighty says*, \"But anything you expend will be
> replaced by Him.\"* (34:39)

289\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Out of a dinar which you spend in the
way of Allah and a dinar which you spend on freeing a slave and a dinar
which you give to a poor person and a dinar which you spend on your
family, the one with the greatest reward is the one which you spend on
your family.\" \[Muslim\]

290\. Abu \'Abdullah, called Abu \'Abdu\'r-Rahman Thawban ibn Bujdad,
the client of the Messenger of Allah reported that the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Is not the best
dinar a man spends the dinar which he spends on his family and the dinar
which he spends on his mount in the way of Allah and the dinar which he
spends on his companions in the way of Allah?\" \[Muslim\]

291\. Umm Salama said, \"I said, \'Messenger of Allah, will I have a
reward if I maintain the sons of Abu Salama when they are my sons? I
cannot leave them to go here and there in search of a livelihood\' He
said, \'Yes, you will have a reward for what you spend on them.\'\"
\[Agreed upon\]

292\. Sa\'id ibn Abi Waqqas reported in his long hadith which we put at
the beginning of the book in the chapter on intention, is that the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said to
him, \"You will be rewarded for whatever you spend on your family
desiring by it the Face of Allah, even for the morsel you put in your
wife\'s mouth.\" \[Agreed upon\]

293\. Abu Mas\'ud al-Badri reported is that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"When a man spends on his family and
sincerely hopes to be rewarded for it, it is sadaqa for him.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

294\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr ibn al-\'As reported that the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"It is sin enough
for a man that he neglects someone whom he is supposed to feed.\" \[Abu
Dawud and others\]

Muslim has something of a similar meaning in his *Sahih* Collection,
\"It is sin enough for a man to withhold the food of someone he owns.\"

295\. Abu Hurayra reported the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, said, \"There is no day which dawns on the slaves of Allah
without two angels descending and one of them saying, \'O Allah, refund
those who give money\' and the other saying, \'O Allah, ruin those who
withhold it.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

296\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"The upper hand is better than the lower hand.
Begin with your dependants. The best sadaqa is that given by the
wealthy. Anyone who refrains \[from asking\], Allah will spare him the
need to and anyone who seeks to be independent, Allah will give him
independence.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

[]{#spend}**37. Chapter: Spending out of what one loves and spending
what is excellent**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"You will not attain true goodness until you
> give of what you love\"* (W3:91; H3:92) and the Almighty says, *\"O
> you who believe! Give away some of the good things you have earned and
> some of what We produce for you from the earth. Do not have recourse
> to bad things when you give, things you would only take with your eyes
> shut tight.*\" (W2:266; H2:267)

297\. Anas said, \"Abu Talha had more property in palm trees than any of
the Ansar in Madina. His favourite property was Bayruha\' which was
opposite the mosque. The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to enter it and drink its sweet water.\" Anas
said, \"When this ayat was sent down: *\'You will not attain true
goodness until you give of what you love,*\'(W3:91; H3:92) Abu Talha
went to the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
and said, \'Messenger of Allah, Allah, Almighty says, \"You will not
attain true goodness until you give of what you love\" The property I
love the best is Bayruha\'. It is *sadaqa* for Allah whose goodness I
hope for and I hope that it will be stored up for me with Allah
Almighty. Messenger of Allah, dispose of it in whatever way Allah shows
you is best.\' The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said, \'Excellent! That is a profitable property. That is is a
profitable property. I have heard what you have said and I think that
you should give it to your relatives.\' Abu Talha said, \'I will do
that, Messenger of Allah!\' So Abu Talha divided it among his relatives
and cousins.\" \[Agreed upon\]

[]{#command}**38. Chapter: On the obligation to command one\'s family
and children and whoever is in one\'s care to obey Allah, and to forbid
them to oppose Him, teaching them proper behaviour and preventing them
from committing what is prohibited**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Instruct your family to do the prayer and be
> constant in it,\"* (W20:131; H20:132) and the Almighty says, *\"O you
> who believe, safeguard yourselves and your families from a Fire.\"*
> (66:6)\
>  \
>  

298\. Abu Hurayra said, \"Al-Hasan ibn \'Ali took a date from the
*sadaqa* dates and put it in his mouth. The Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \'No, no! Spit it out\'. He
said, \'Are you not aware that we do not eat *sadaqa*?\'\" \[Agreed
upon\]

In one variant, \"*Sadaqa* is not lawful for us.\"

299\. Abu Hafs \'Umar ibn Abi Salama \'Abdu\'l-Asad, the stepson of the
Messenger of Allah, said, \"I was a child under the guardianship of the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, and my hand
would go around in the dish. The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said to me, \'Boy, say the name of Allah Almighty
and eat with your right hand and eat what is in front of you.\' That
became the way I ate ever afterwards.\" \[Agreed upon\]

300\. Ibn \'Umar said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, say, \'All of you are shepherds and each of you
is responsible for his flock. An Imam is a shepherd and he is
responsible for those in his care. A man is a shepherd in respect of his
family and is responsible for those in his care. The woman is a shepherd
in respect of her husband\'s house and is responsible for those in her
care. The servant is a shepherd in respect of his master\'s property and
is responsible for what is in his care. All of you are shepherds and
each of you is responsible for his flock.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

301\. The grandfather of \'Amr ibn Shu\'ayb said, \"The Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \'Command your
children to pray when they are seven. Beat them to make them do it when
they are ten and separate them in their beds.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

302\. Abu Thurayya Sabra ibn Ma\'bad al-Juhani reported that the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said,
\"Teach a child the prayer at the age of seven and beat him to make him
do it when he is ten.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

Abu Dawud has, \"Command a child to pray when he reaches the age of
seven.\"

[]{#neighbour}**39. Chapter: The right of the neighbour and treating him
well**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Worship Allah and do not associate anything
> with Him. Be good to your parents and relatives and to orphans and the
> very poor, and to neighbours who are related to you and neighbours who
> are not related to you, and to companions and travellers and your
> slaves.\"* (4:36)

303\. Ibn \'Umar and \'A\'isha reported: \"The Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \'Jibril continued to advise
me to be good to my neighbour until I thought that he would have me make
him my heir.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

304\. Abu Dharr reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"O Abu Dharr, if you cook a stew put a
lot of water in it, keeping your neighbours in mind.\" \[Muslim\]

In one variant, Abu Dharr said, \"My friend, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, advised me, \'When you cook a stew, put a lot of water
in it and then go and see the people of a neighbouring house and give
them a reasonable amount of it.\"

305\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"By Allah, he does not believe! By Allah, he
does not believe! By Allah, he does not believe!\" It was asked, \"Who
is that, Messenger of Allah?\" He said, \"Someone whose neighbour is not
safe from his mischief!\" \[Agreed upon\]

In Muslim\'s variant, \"No one will enter the Garden whose neighbour is
not safe from his mischief.\"

306\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"O Muslim women! No one should look down
on a gift from her neighbour, even if it is only a sheep\'s trotter.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

307\. Abu Hurayra reported the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"No neighbour should prevent his neighbour
from inserting a piece of wood in his wall.\" Then Abu Hurayra said,
\"Why do I see that you are averse to this? By Allah, I will hurl it at
you between your shoulders!\" \[Agreed upon\]

308\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who believes in Allah and the
Last Day should not harm his neighbour. Anyone who believes in Allah and
the Last Day should honour his guest. Anyone who believes in Allah and
the Last Day should speak well or be silent.\" \[Agreed upon\]

309\. Abu Shurayh al-Khuza\'i reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who believes in Allah and the
Last Day should be good to his neighbour. Anyone who believes in Allah
and the Last Day should honour his guest. Anyone who believes in Allah
and the Last Day should speak well or be silent.\" \[Muslim. Al-Bukhari
has part of it.\]

310\. \'A\'isha said, \"I asked, \'Messenger of Allah, I have two
neighbours. To which of them should I give?\' He replied, \'To the one
whose door is nearer to you.\'\" \[al-Bukhari\]

311\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"The best of companions in
the sight of Allah Almighty is the one who acts best towards his
companion. The best of neighbours in the sight of Allah Almighty is the
one who acts best towards his neighbour.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Previous Page](/riyad1)**

**[Next Page](/riyad3)**

**[Return to Home Page](/)**
