**[Book of the *Adab* of Travelling]{#travel}**

**166. Chapter: On the Recommendation to set out on a journey on a
Thursday at the beginning of the day**

956\. Ka\'b ibn Malik said, \" The Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, left on the expedition of Tabuk on a Thursday. He liked
to set out on Thursdays.\" \[Agreed upon\]

In one variant, \"Rarely did the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, set out on other than a Thursday.\"

957\. Sakhr ibn Qada\'a al-Ghamidi the Companion reported that the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"O
Allah, bless our community in its mornings.\" When he sent out an
expedition or an army, he sent them forth at the beginning of the day.
Sakhr was a merchant. He used to send out his goods at the beginning of
the day and he became wealthy and had a lot of property.\" \[Abu Dawud
and at-Tirmidhi\]

**167. Chapter: On the Recommendation to have company on a journey and
the travellers should appoint someone as their amir whom they will
obey**

958\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"If people knew what I know about
travelling alone, no one would travel for a single night alone.\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

959\. \'Amr ibn Shu\'ayb reported from his grandfather that the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"One
rider is shaytan. Two riders are two shaytans. Three is a troop.\" \[Abu
Dawud, at-Tirmidhi, and an-Nasa\'i\]

960\. Abu Sa\'id and Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"When three set out on a
journey, they should appoint one of them as amir.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

961\. Ibn \'Abbas reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"The best \[number\] of companions is four, and
the best of expeditions is 400 and the best of armies is 4000. 12,000
Muslims will not be defeated for lack of numbers.\" \[Abu Dawud and
at-Tirmidhi\]

**168. Chapter: On the *adab* of Travelling, Stopping, Spending the
Night and Sleeping on the Journey. The recommendation to travel by night
and to be kind to animals and see to their best interests**

962\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"When you travel at a time of fertility,
then give the camel its share of the earth. When you travel at an arid
time, then travel quickly on it and hurry before its hump disappears.
When you camp at night, avoid the roadway. Roads are the paths of
animals and the refuge of reptiles at night.\" \[Muslim\]

963\. Abu Qatada said, \"When the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, was on a journey, he would stop during the
night, lying down on his right side. When he stopped during the night
and it was close to the time of Subh, he would set his arm upright and
put his head on his palm.\" \[Muslim\]

Scholars say that he put up his arm so that he would not sleep deeply
and miss the Subh prayer at its time, or the beginning of its time.

964\. Anas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"You should travel during the night. The earth
is rolled up at night.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

965\. Abu Tha\'laba al-Khushani said, \"When people alighted in a place,
they would go off separately, going off into the ravines and valleys.
The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said,
\'Your going off separately into these ravines and valleys comes from
Shaytan.\' Then after that they would always group together when they
alighted in a place.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

966\. Sahl ibn \'Amr (and it is said Sahl ibn ar-Rabi\' ibn \'Amr
al-Ansari), known as Ibn al-Hanzala, who was one of the people of the
Pledge of Ridwan. said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, passed by a camel whose back was sticking to its
belly and said, \'Fear Allah in respect of these dumb animals. Ride them
in good condition and eat them in good condition.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

967\. Abu Ja\'far \'Abdullah ibn Ja\'far said, \"The Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, had me ride behind him one day
and he confided to me something which I will not relate to anyone else.
The place which the Messenger of Allah liked best for concealing himself
when answering a call of nature was a high barrier of some kind or a
palm enclosure, i.e. a palm garden.\" \[Muslim\]

Al-Barqani added to it after his words, \"a palm enclosure,\" \"He
entered a garden belonging to one of the Ansar. There was a camel there.
When it saw the Messenger of Allah, it made a noise and its eyes started
watering. The Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, came to
it and stroked its back - i.e. its hump and behind its ears - and then
it calmed down. He said, \'Who is the owner of this camel? To whom does
this camel belong?\' A boy of the Ansar came and said, \'It is mine,
Messenger of Allah.\' He said, \'Do you not fear Allah regarding this
animal over which Allah has given you power? It complains to me that you
starve it and tire it out.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

968\. Anas said, \"When we alighted in a place, we did not pray
supererogatory prayers until we had let the camels loose.\" \[Abu
Dawud\]

**169: On helping one\'s companion**

969\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri said, \"While we were on a journey, a man
came on a mount of his and he began to look to the right and the left.
The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said,
\'Anyone who has a spare mount should offer it to someone who has not
got one, and anyone who has extra provisions should offer them to the
someone who has no provisions.\' He went on mentioning various sorts of
property until we thought that no one had any right to anything extra.\"
\[Muslim\]

970\. Jabir reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, wanted to go an expedition and said, \"O company of
Muhajirun and Ansar! Among your brothers are people who have neither
property nor tribe. Each of you should attach two or three men to
himself then each of us can take turns in being carried like them.\"
Jabir said, \"I attached two or three to myself and took turns on my
camel like one of them.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

971\. Jabir said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to go to the rear during journeys and he would
urge on the weak and mount them behind him and make supplication for
them.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

**170. Chapter: On what one says when one mounting for a journey**

> *Allah says, \"He who created all the species and gave you ships and
> livestock for you to ride, so that you might sit firmly on their backs
> and remember your Lord\'s blessing while you are seated on them,
> saying, \'Glory be to Him who subjected this to us. We could never
> have done it by ourselves. Indeed we are returning to our Lord!\'\"*
> (W43:11-13; H43:12-14)

972\. Ibn \'Umar reported that when the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, settled on his camel to go out on a
journey, he said the takbir three times. Then he said, \"Glory be to the
One who has subjected this to us when we did not have the ability to do
it. We are turning to our Lord. O Allah, we ask You in this journey of
ours for piety and Godfearing and action which is pleasing to You. O
Allah, make this journey of ours easy for us and roll up its distance
for us. O Allah, You are our Companion in the journey and our Khalif in
our family. O Allah, I seek refuge with You from the hardship of this
journey and any sight which brings sorrow and an inauspicious return in
respect of property, family and children.\" When he returned, he would
say this and add to it, \"Returning, turning in repentance, worshipping
our Lord, praising.\" \[Muslim\]

973\. \'Abdullah ibn Sarjis said, \"When the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, travelled, he sought refuge from
the hardship of the journey, from a sorrowful return, from decrease
after substance, and from the supplication of the wronged and from any
evil sight in respect of his family or property.\" \[Muslim\]

Scholars say that the meaning of *kawn* (substance) is to return from a
stable state or a state of increase to a state of decrease.

974\. \'Ali ibn Rabi\'a said, \"I was once with \'Ali ibn Abi Talib when
he was brought an animal to ride. When he put his foot in the stirrup,
he said, \'In the name of Allah,\' When he was upright on its back, he
said, \'Glory be to Him who subjected this to us. We could never have
done it by ourselves. Indeed we are returning to our Lord!\' Then he
said, \'Praise be to Allah\' three times. Then he said, \'Allah is
greater\' three times. Then he said, \'Glory be to You. I have wronged
myself, so forgive me. None forgives wrong actions except You.\' Then he
laughed and was asked, \'Amir al-Mu\'minin! what made you laugh?\' He
said, \'I saw the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, do
as I did. Then he laughed and I said, \"O Messenger of Allah, what made
you laugh?\" He said, \"Your Lord marvels at His slave when he says,
\'Forgive me my wrong actions, when he knows very well that no one other
than Me can forgive wrong actions.\'\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

**171. Chapter: The *takbir* of the traveller when he ascends, his
*tasbih* when he descends and the prohibition against raising the voice
with the *takbir***

975\. Jabir said, \"When we went up a slope, we would say, \'Allah is
great,\' and when we descended, we would say, \'Glory be to Allah.\'\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

976\. Ibn \'Umar said, \"When the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, and his armies went up a hill, they used to say the *takbir*
and when they went down one, they said, \'Glory be to Allah.\'\" \[Abu
Dawud\]

977\. Ibn \'Umar reported that when the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, returned from hajj or \'umra, whenever he went up a
hill or a slope, he would say the takbir three times and then would say,
\"There is no god but Allah alone with no partner. To Him belongs the
kingdom and to Him belongs praise and He has power over everything,
returning, turning in repentance, worshipping, prostrating to our Lord,
praising. Allah has been true to His promise and helped His slave and
defeated the parties alone.\" \[Agreed upon\]

In a variant of Muslim, \"When he returned from military campaigns,
expeditions, *hajj* or *\'umra*.\"

978\. Abu Hurayra reported that a man said, \"O Messenger of Allah, I
want to go on a journey, so give me some advice.\" He said, \"You should
have fear of Allah and say the *takbir* on every slope.\" When the man
turned away, he said, \"O Allah, roll up the distance for him and make
the journey easy for him.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

979\. Abu Musa al-Ash\'ari said, \"We were with the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, and whenever we climbed up
above a valley, we would say, \'There is no god but Allah and Allah is
greater\" with our voices raised. The Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \'O people! Be kind to yourselves! You are not
calling someone who is deaf or absent. He is with you, listening.\'\"
\[Agreed upon\]

**172. Chapter: The recommendation to make supplication during the
journey**

980\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Three supplications will be answered
without a doubt: the supplication of someone who is wronged, the
supplication of a traveller and the supplication of a parent for his
child.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

**173. Chapter: On what supplication is made when one is afraid of
people or something else**

981\. Abu Musa al-Ash\'ari reported that when the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, feared a people, he said, \'O
Allah, We put You at their throats \[to protect us\]. We seek refuge
with You from their evil.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

**174. Chapter: On what one says when one alights at a place**

982\. Khawla bint Hakim said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \'Anyone who alights in a
place should say, \"I seek refuge with the perfect words of Allah from
the evil of what He has created,\" and then nothing will harm him until
he travels on from that place.\'\" \[Muslim\]

983\. Ibn \'Umar said, \"When the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, travelled, and night approached, he would say,
\'O earth, my Lord and your Lord is Allah. I seek refuge with Allah from
your evil and the evil of what is in You and the evil of what is created
in You and the evil of what creeps on You. I seek refuge with Allah from
the evil of the lion and the great black snake, and from the snake and
the scorpion, and from the jinn who live in the land and from the
begetter and what he begets \[i.e. Iblis and the shaytans\].\'\" \[Abu
Dawud\]

**175. Chapter: On the recommendation for the traveller to make haste to
return to his family when he has achieved his purpose**

984\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Travelling is a form of punishment. It
deprives a person of his food and drink and sleep. When he fulfils the
purpose of his journey, he should hurry back to his family.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

**176. Chapter: On the recommendation to come to one\'s family during
the day and the dislike of arriving at night when that is not
necessary**

985\. Jabir stated that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"When one of you is absent for a long time, he
should not return to his family at night.\" \[Agreed upon\]

One variant states that the Messenger of Allah forbade a man to return
to his family at night.

986\. Anas said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, used to not return to his family at night. He would only
arrive in the morning or the afternoon.\" \[Agreed upon\]

**177. Chapter: On what one says when he returns and sees his town**

987\. Anas said, \"We continued on with the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, until we were in sight of Madina. Then he said,
\'Returning, turning in repentance, worshipping our Lord, praising.\' He
continued saying that until we reached Madina.\" \[Muslim\]

**178. Chapter: On the recommendation for the one who arrives to go
first to the mosque in his area and pray two *rak\'ats* in it**

988\. Ka\'b ibn Malik reported that when the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, came back from a journey, he went
first to the mosque and prayed two *rak\'ats*.\" \[Agreed upon\]

**179. Chapter: On forbidding a woman to travel on her own**

989\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"It is not lawful for a woman who
believes in Allah and the Last Day to travel the distance of a day and a
night without having a *dhu mahram* with her.\" \[Agreed upon\]

990\. Ibn \'Abbas reported that he heard the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"A man should not be on his own with a
woman unless there is a *dhu mahram* with her. A woman should only
travel with a *dhu mahram*.\" A man said to him, \"Messenger of Allah,
what if my wife goes out on hajj when I have been appointed to go on
such-and-such an expedition?\" He said, \"Go and do hajj with your
wife.\" \[Agreed upon\]

\[A *dhu mahram* is a close male relative with whom marriage is
forbidden.\]

**[Book of Virtues]{#virtues}**

**[Recitation of the Qur\'an]{#qur'an}**

**180. Chapter: On the Excellence of reciting the Qur\'an**

991\. Abu Umama said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, say, \'Recite the Qur\'an. It will appear on
the Day of Rising as an intercessor for its people.\'\" \[Muslim\]

992\. an-Nawwas ibn Sam\'an said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \'On the Day of Rising the
Qur\'an will be brought with the people who used to act by it in this
world, preceded by *Surat al-Baqara* (2) and *Ali \'Imran* (3), arguing
on behalf of those who knew them.\'\" \[Muslim\]

993\. \'Uthman reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"The best of you is the one who learns the
Qur\'an and teaches it.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

994\. \'A\'isha reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Someone who recites the Qur\'an and is
fluent in it, is with the noble pious angels. Someone who recites the
Qur\'an and stammers in it has two rewards as it is difficult for him.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

995\. Abu Musa al-Ash\'ari reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"The metaphor of a believer
who recites the Qur\'an is that of a citron - its scent is fragrant and
its taste is good. The metaphor of a believer who does not recite the
Qur\'an is that of a date - it has no scent but its taste is sweet. The
metaphor of a hypocrite who recites the Qur\'an is that of basil - its
scent is fragrant but its taste is bitter. The metaphor of a hypocrite
who does not recite the Qur\'an is that of colocynth - it has no scent
and its taste is bitter.\" \[Agreed upon\]

996\. \'Umar ibn al-Khattab reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"By this Book Allah elevates some people
and abases others.\" \[Muslim\]

997\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"You can only have envy for two things: for a
man to whom Allah has given the Qur\'an and he gets up and recites it
throughout the night, and for a man to whom Allah has given wealth and
he spends it throughout the night and the day.\" \[Agreed upon\]

998\. Al-Bara\' ibn \'Azib said, \"A man was reciting *Surat al-Kahf*
(18) and he had a horse with him tethered by two ropes. Then a cloud
came over him and began to draw near and his horse began to shy away
from it. In the morning he went to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, and mentioned that to him and he said, \'That was the
*Sakina* which descended on account of the Qur\'an.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

999\. Ibn Mas\'ud reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Whoever recites a letter of the Book of
Allah earns a good deed, and each good deed is worth ten like it. I do
not say that \'*Alif-lam-mim*\' is one letter, but that *alif* is a
letter, *lam* is a letter, *mim* is a letter.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1000\. Ibn \'Abbas stated that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"A person who has nothing of the Qur\'an
inside him is like a ruined house.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1001\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr ibn al-\'As reported that the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"It will be said to those
who know the Qur\'an, \'Recite and ascend. Recite slowly as you did in
the world below. Your station will be at the last verse you recite.\'\"
\[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

**182. Chapter: On the command to continue reciting the Qur\'an and
being careful not to allow oneself to forget it**

1002\. Abu Musa reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, said, \"Make a habit of reciting this Qur\'an. By the One in
whose hand the soul of Muhammad is, it slips away free quicker than a
camel gets loose from its hobble.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1003\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The metaphor of someone who knows the
Qur\'an is that of a hobbled camel. If he attends to it, it stays with
him. If he lets it go, it wanders away.\" \[Agreed upon\]

**182. Chapter: On the recommendation to have good voice in reciting the
Qur\'an and asking someone with a good voice to recite and listening to
it**

1004\. Abu Hurayra said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \"Allah does not listen to anything
so gladly as He listens to a Prophet with a good voice chanting the
Qur\'an aloud.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1005\. Abu Musa al-Ash\'ari reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said to him, \"You have been given
one of the flutes of the family of Da\'ud.\" \[Agreed upon\]

In a variant of Muslim is that the Messenger of Allah said to him, \"If
you could only have seen me listening to your recitation last night.\"

1006\. Al-Bara\' ibn \'Azib said, \"I heard the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, reciting *\'Wa\'t-tini wa\'z-zaytun\'* (95) in
the *\'Isha\'* prayer and I have never heard anyone with a better voice
or better recitation than he had.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1007\. Abu Lubaba Bashir ibn \'Abdu\'l-Mundhir reported that the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who
does not use a good voice when reciting the Qur\'an is not one of us.\"
\[Abu Dawud\]

1008\. Ibn Mas\'ud said, \"The Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, said to me, \'Recite the Qur\'an to me.\' I said, \'O
Messenger of Allah, shall I recite to you when it was sent down to
you?\' He said, \'I want to hear it from someone other than myself.\' So
I recited *Surat an-Nisa\'* to him until I reached this ayat, *\'How
will it be when We bring a witness from every nation and bring you as a
witness against them?\'* (4:41) He said, \'That is enough now,\' and I
turned to him and his eyes were flowing with tears.\" \[Agreed upon\]

**183. Chapter: On encouraging the recitation of certain *suras* and
*ayats***

1009\. Abu Sa\'id Rafi\' ibn al-Mu\'alla said, \"The Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said to me, \'Shall I teach you
the greatest *sura* of the Qur\'an before you leave the mosque?\' He
took my hand. When we were about to leave, I said, \'Messenger of Allah,
you said, \"I will teach you the greatest *sura* of the Qur\'an?\"\' He
said, \'\"Praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds\" (the beginning of the
*Fatiha*) are the Seven Oft-repeated ones and the Immense Qur\'an which
I was given.\'\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1010\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said about the *sura, \"Say: He is
Allah, Absolute Oneness\"* (112)\"By the One in whose hand my soul is,
it is equal to a third of the Qur\'an.\"

In a variant is that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said to his Companions, \"Are any of you unable to
recite a third of the Qur\'an in a night?\" That was difficult for them
and they said, \"Which of us is able to do that, Messenger of Allah?\"
He said, \"\[The *sura*\] *\'Say: He is Allah, Absolute Oneness, Allah,
the Everlasting Sustainer of all\'* (112) constitutes a third of the
Qur\'an.\'\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1011\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri said that a man heard another man reciting,
*\"Say: He is Allah, Absolute Oneness,\"* (112) and repeating it. In the
morning he went to the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, and mentioned that to him, and it was as if he was belittling
the man. The Messenger of Allah said to him, \"By the One who has my
soul in His hand, it is equal to a third of the Qur\'an.\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

1012\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said that *\"Say: He is Allah, Absolute
Oneness\"* is equal to a third of the Qur\'an. \[Muslim\]

1013\. Anas mentioned that a man said, \"Messenger of Allah, I love this
sura, *\'Say: He is Allah, Absolute Oneness\'*.\" He said, \"Love of it
will take you into the Garden.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1014\. \'Uqba ibn \'Amir reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Have you not seen the ayats sent
down this night the like of which have never been seen before? *\'Say: I
seek refuge with the Lord of Daybreak,\'* and *\'Say: I seek refuge with
the Lord of mankind.\'\"* (113 & 114) \[Muslim\]

1015\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, used to take refuge from the jinn and
from men until the two *suras* of refuge were sent down. When they were
sent down, he utilised them and left other things.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1016\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The Qur\'an contains a *sura* of thirty
*ayats* which will intercede for a man until he is forgiven. It is:
*\'Blessed be He who has the Kingdom in His Hand!\'* (67)\" {Abu Dawud
and at-Tirmidhi\]

1017\. Abu Mas\'ud al-Badri reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"If anyone recites the two ayats at the
end of *Surat al-Baqara* (2) at night, they will be enough for him.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1018\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Do not turn your houses into graves.
Shaytan is barred from any house in which *Surat al-Baqara* (2) is
recited.\" \[Muslim\]

1019\. Ubayy ibn Ka\'b reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"O Abu\'l-Mundhir! Do you know
which *ayat* in the Book of Allah is greatest you have?\' I said,
*\'Allah. there is no god but Him, the Living, the Self-Sustaining.\'*
(W2:253; H2:256) He struck me on the chest and said, \'May knowledge
delight you, Abu\'l-Mundhir!\'\" \[Muslim\]

1020\. Abu Hurayra said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, put me in charge of guarding the zakat of Ramadan.
Someone came and began to take handfuls of food. I grabbed him and said,
\'By Allah, I will take you to the Messenger of Allah!\' He said, \'I am
needy and have a large family and I am in dire need.\' I let him go and
in the morning the Prophet said, \'Abu Hurayra, what did you do with
your prisoner yesterday?\' I said, \'Messenger of Allah, he complained
of dire need and a large family, so I showed mercy to him and let him go
on his way.\' He said, \'He lied to you and he will come back.\' So,
from the words of the Messenger of Allah, I knew that he would come
back. Therefore, I lay in wait for him and he came and once more began
to take handfuls of food. I seized him and said, \'I will take you to
the Messenger of Allah!\' He said, \'Let me go. I am in need and have a
large family. I will not come back again.\' I had mercy on him and let
him go his way. In the morning the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said to me, \'Abu Hurayra, what did you do with
your prisoner yesterday?\' I said, \'Messenger of Allah, he complained
of dire need and a large family, so I showed mercy to him and let him go
on his way.\' He said, \'He lied to you and he will come back.\' So I
lay in wait for him a third time and he came and began to take handfuls
of food. I grabbed him and said, \'I will take you to the Messenger of
Allah! This is the third time. You claimed you would not come back and
then you came back.\' He said, \'Let me go. I will teach you some words
which will help you with Allah.\' I said, \'What are they?\' He said,
\'When you go to bed, recite the Throne Verse, *\"Allah, there is no god
but Him, the Living, the Self-Sustaining\...\"* to the end of the
*ayat*. You will have someone guarding over you from Allah and shaytan
will not come near you until morning.\' So I let him go his way. In the
morning, the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said to me, \'What did you do with your prisoner yesterday?\' I
said, \'Messenger of Allah, he claimed that he would teach me some words
which would help me with Allah, so I let him go his way.\' He said,
\'What are they?\' I said, \'He said to me, \"When you go to bed, recite
the Throne Verse to the end: *\'Allah, there is no god but Him, the
Living, the Self-Sustaining\'.*\" He said to me, \"You will have someone
guarding over you from Allah and shaytan will not come near you until
morning.\"\' The Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said,
\"He told you the truth even though he is a liar. Do you know whom you
were speaking with on these three days, Abu Hurayra?\'\" He said,
\"No.\" The Prophet said, \"It was Shaytan.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1021\. Abu\'d-Darda\' reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who memorises ten *ayats*
from the beginning of *Surat al-Kahf* (18) will be protected from the
Dajjal.\" \[Muslim\]

One variant has, \"from the end of *Surat al-Kahf*.\"

1022\. Ibn \'Abbas said, \"While Jibril, peace be upon him, was sitting
with the Prophet, he heard a sound above him and raised his head. He
said, \'This is a door of heaven which has been opened today and which
has never been opened before today. An angel descended from it.\' He
said, \'This is an angel who has descended to earth who has never
descended before today.\' He gave the greeting and said, \'Give the good
news of two lights which you have been given and which no Prophet before
you was given: the *Fatiha* of the Book and the end of *Surat al-Baqara*
(2). You will not recite a letter of them without being given it.\'\"
\[Muslim\]

**184. Chapter: On the Recommendation to meet together for recitation**

1023\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"People do not meet in one of the houses
of Allah to recite the Book of Allah and study it together without
tranquillity descending on them, mercy covering them, the angels
encircling them and Allah mentioning them to those who are with Him.\"
\[Muslim\]

**[185. Chapter: On the Excellence of *Wudu\'*]{#wudu}**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"O you who believe! When you get up to do the
> prayer, wash your faces and your hands,\" to His words, \'Allah does
> not want to make things difficult for you, but He does want to purify
> you and to perfect His blessing upon you so that perhaps you may show
> thanks.\"* (W5:6; H5:6)

1024\. Abu Hurayra said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \'On the Day of Rising my community
will be called \'those with white blazes on their foreheads and limbs\'
from the effects of *wudu\'.* So whoever of you can increase the extent
of the whiteness, should do so.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1025\. Abu Hurayra said, \"I heard my friend, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, say, \'The adornment of the believer reaches the places
his *wudu\'* reaches.\" \[Muslim\]

1026\. \'Uthman ibn \'Affan reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who does *wudu\'*
and does it well, his mistakes leave his body, even from under his
nails.\" \[Muslim\]

1027\. \'Uthman ibn \'Affan said, \"I saw the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, do *wudu\'* like I am doing
*wudu\'* now. Then he said, \'Anyone who does *wudu\'* like that, will
be forgiven his previous wrong actions, and his prayer and his walking
to the mosque are an added bonus.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1028\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"When the Muslim - or believing - slave
does *wudu\'* and washes his face, every wrong thing at which his eyes
have looked leaves with the water - or with the last drop of water. When
he washes his hands, every wrong thing which his hands have touched
leaves with the water - or with the last drop of water. When he washes
his feet. every wrong thing to which his feet have walked leaves with
the water -- or with the last drop of water, until he emerges cleansed
of sins.\" \[Muslim\]

1029\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, came to the graveyard and said, \'Peace be upon
you, abode of a believing people. Allah willing, we will join you. I
wish that we could see our brothers.\' They said, \'Are we not your
brothers, Messenger of Allah?\' He said, \'You are my Companions. My
brothers are those who have not yet come.\' They said, \'How can you
know someone of your community who has not yet come, Messenger of
Allah?\' He said, \'Do you not think that if a man had horses with white
blazes which were among dark black horses, that he would recognise his
horses?\' They said, \'Yes indeed. Messenger of Allah.\' He said, \'They
will come with white blazes from *wudu\'* and I will precede them to the
Basin.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1030\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Shall I direct you to something by
which Allah will wipe out errors and raise degrees?\' They said, \"Yes
please, Messenger of Allah.\" He said, \"Doing thorough *wudu\'* in
adverse circumstances, taking a lot of steps to the mosques and waiting
for one prayer after another prayer. That is what you should hold to.
That is what you should hold to.\" \[Muslim\]

1031\. Abu Malik al-Ash\'ari reported said that the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Purity is half of
belief.\" \[Muslim\]

1032\. \'Umar ibn al-Khattab reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"No one among you does wudu\' and does
*wudu\'* thoroughly --- or adequately - and then testifies, \'There is
no god but Allah Alone with no partner and I testify that Muhammad is
His slave and Messenger\' without the eight doors of the Garden being
opened to him so that he can enter by whichever of them he wishes.\"
\[Muslim\]

At-Tirmidhi adds, \"O Allah, make me one of those who repent and put me
among the purified.\"

**[186. Chapter: On the excellence of the *adhan*]{#adhan}**

1033\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"If people only knew what was in the
call to prayer and the first row, and could find no other way to get it
than drawing lots for it, they would certainly draw lots for it. If they
only knew what there was in going early to the prayer, they would race
each other to get there. And if they only knew what was in the prayers
of *\'Isha\'* and *Subh*, they would come to them even if they had to
crawl.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1034\. Mu\'awiya said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, say, \'The *mu\'adhdhins* will be the people
with the longest necks (from yearning) on the Day of Rising.\"
\[Muslim\]

1035\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri said to \'Abdullah ibn \'Abdu\'r-Rahman ibn
Abi Sa\'sa\'a, \"I see that you love sheep and the desert. When you are
among your sheep or in the desert, give the call to prayer and raise
your voice when doing it. No jinn or man or anything within range hears
the voice of the *mu\'adhdhin* without bearing witness for him on the
Day of Rising.\" Abu Sa\'id said, \"I heard this from the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1036\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"When the call to prayer is done Shaytan
retreats, farting so that he will not hear it. When the call is finished
he comes back again until the *iqama* is done, when he retreats again.
When the *iqama* is finished, he comes back again, insinuating himself
between a man and his self and saying, \'Think of such-and-such, think
of such-and-such,\' which he was not thinking about before, until the
man does not know how much he has prayed.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1037\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr ibn al-\'As heard the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \"When you hear (someone
calling) the adhan, say the same as he says and then say the prayer on
me. If anyone says one prayer on me, Allah says ten prayers on him. Then
ask Allah to give me \"*al-wasila*\" (the means). It is a station in the
Garden which only one of the slaves of Allah will reach, and I hope that
it will be me. My intercession will be available to anyone who asks
Allah for \"*al-wasila*\" for me.\" \[Muslim\]

1038\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, aid, \"When you hear the *adhan*,
repeat what the *mu\'adhdhin* says.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1039\. Jabir ibn \'Abdullah reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"My intercession will be
available on the Day of Rising to anyone who says, after hearing the
*adhan*, \'O Allah! Lord of this perfect call and established prayer,
give Muhammad \"*al-wasila*\" and superiority and raise him up to the
praiseworthy station which You promised him. \" \[al-Bukhari\]

1040\. Sa\'d ibn Abi Waqqas reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who says, when he hears the
*mu\'adhdhin*, \'I testify that there is no god but Allah alone with no
partner and that Muhammad is His slave and Messenger. I am pleased with
Allah as Lord, with Muhammad as Messenger, and Islam as deen,\' will
have his wrong actions forgiven.\" \[Muslim\]

1041\. Anas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"A supplication between the adhan and the
iqama is not rejected.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

**[187. Chapter: On the excellence of the prayers]{#salat}**

1042\. Abu Hurayra said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \'What do you think would happen if
there was a river by someone\'s door in which he washed five times every
day? Do you think that any dirt would remain on him?\' They said, \'Not
a scrap of dirt would remain on him.\' He said, \'That is a metaphor of
the five prayers by which Allah wipes out wrong actions.\'\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1043\. Jabir reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"The metaphor of the five prayers is that of
an sizeable flowing river at the door of one of you in which he washes
five times every day.\" \[Muslim\]

1044\. Ibn Mas\'ud reported that a man received a kiss from a woman and
went to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, and told
him about it. Allah sent down, *\"Establish the prayer at the two ends
of the day and in the first part of the night. Good actions eradicate
bad actions.\"* (11:114) The man said, \"Messenger of Allah, is this for
me?\" He said, \"It is for every single one of my community.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1045\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The five prayers, and Jumu\'a to
Jumu\'a is expiation for what is between them as long as a man has
committed no major sins.\" \[Muslim\]

1046\. \'Uthman ibn \'Affan said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \"There is no Muslim man who
attends a prescribed prayer and does wudu\' for it well and is humble in
it and in its bowing, without that being expiation for the sins before
it as long as he did not commit any major sin. This will always apply.\"
\[Muslim\]

**188. Chapter: On the *Subh* and *\'Asr* prayers**

1047\. Abu Musa reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Whoever prays the two cool ones will
enter the Garden.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1048\. Abu Zuhayr \'Umara ibn Ruwayba said, \"I heard the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \'No one who used
to pray before the rising of the sun and before its setting will enter
the Fire,\" meaning Fajr and *\'Asr*.\" \[Muslim\]

1049\. Jundub ibn Sufyan reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who prays the *Subh*
prayer is in Allah\'s keeping. O son of Adam, watch out that Allah does
not demand from you anything that is in His keeping.\" \[Muslim\]

1050\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"There are angels which take turns in
being with you in the night and other angels in the day and they meet
together at the prayers of *Fajr* and \'Asr. Then the ones who were with
you during the night ascend and Allah asks them - although He knows
better than they do - \'How were My slaves when you left them?\' They
say, \'When we left them they were praying and when we came to them,
they were praying.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1051\. Jarir ibn \'Abdullah al-Bajali said, \"We were with the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, and he looked at the full moon
on the night of Badr and said, \'You will see your Lord as you see this
moon and you will not be harmed by seeing Him. If you can manage not to
be overwhelmed to the point of missing the prayer before the sun rises
and before it sets, don\'t be.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1052\. Burayda reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"If anyone misses the prayer of *\'Asr* ,
his actions will come to nothing.\"\[al-Bukhari\]

**189. Chapter: On the excellence of walking to the mosque**

1053\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Allah will prepare a residence in the Garden
for anyone who goes to the mosque morning and evening each morning and
evening that he goes.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1054\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who purifies himself in his house and
then goes to one of the houses of Allah to fulfil one of the obligations
of Allah, one step removes an error and the other raises him a degree.\"
\[Muslim\]

1055\. Ubayy ibn Ka\'b said, \"There was a man of the Ansar and I do not
know of any man who lived further from the mosque than him. He never
missed a prayer. It was said to him, \'You should buy a donkey which you
could ride in the dark and when it is very hot.\' He said, \'It would
not make me happier if my house were right next to the mosque. I want my
steps to the mosque to be written down for me and also my return when I
return to my family. The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Allah will combine all that for you.\"\'\"
\[Muslim\]

1056\. Jabir said, \"The area around the mosque was empty and the Banu
Salama wanted to move near to the mosque and the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, heard about it. He said to them, \'It has
reached me that you want to move near to the mosque?\' They said, \'Yes,
Messenger of Allah, we do want that.\' He said, \'Banu Salama, keep the
houses you have. Your footprints are written down. Keep the houses you
have! Your footprints are written down.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1057\. Abu Musa reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The people who get the greatest reward
for the prayer are those who live furthest away and then the next
furthest. Someone who waits for the prayer so that he can pray it with
the Imam has a greater reward than someone who prays and then goes to
sleep.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1058\. Burayda reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, said, \"Give good news to those who walk to mosques in the
dark that they will have full light on the Day of Rising.\" \[Abu Dawud
and at-Tirmidhi\]

1059\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Shall I direct you to something by
which Allah will wipe out errors and raise degrees?\' They said, \"Yes
please, Messenger of Allah.\" He said, \"Doing thorough wudu\' in
adverse circumstances, taking a lot of steps to the mosques and waiting
for one prayer after another prayer. That is what you should hold to.
That is what you should hold to.\" \[Muslim\]

1060\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"If you see a man who frequents mosques,
then testify to his belief. Allah, the Mighty and Exalted, says, *\"The
mosques of Allah should only be frequented be by those who believe in
Allah and the Last Day\...\'* (9:18)\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

**190. Chapter: On the excellence of waiting for the prayer**

1061\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Each of you is in the prayer as long as
he is waiting for it and there is nothing but the prayer preventing him
from going to his family.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1062\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The angels pray for every one of you as
long as you remain in the place in which you prayed and do not break
*wudu\'*, saying, \'O Allah, forgive him! O Allah, show mercy to
him!\'\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1063\. Anas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, delayed th*e \'Isha\'* prayer until the middle of
the night and then prayed. Then he turned his face to us after he had
prayed and said, \'The people have prayed and gone to sleep, but you
were in prayer the whole time you were waiting for it.\'\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

**191. Chapter: On the excellence of the Group prayer**

1064\. Ibn \'Umar stated that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Prayer in a group is seventy-seven
times better than the prayer of a man by himself.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1065\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The group prayer is twenty-five degrees
higher than the prayer in your house or the prayer in your place of
business. Anyone who does wudu\' and goes to the mosque with no other
object than to do the prayer, Allah will raise him up a degree with
every step he takes, and a wrong action will fall away from him. When he
prays, the angels pray for him all the time he is in his place of
prayer, \'O Allah! Forgive him! O Allah! Show mercy to him!\' One of you
is in the prayer as long as he is waiting for the prayer.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1066\. Abu Hurayra said, \"A blind man came to the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, and said, \'Messenger of Allah, I have no
guide to direct me to the mosque.\' He asked the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, to make an dispensation for him
allowing him to pray in his house, and he gave him that dispensation.
When he turned away, he called to him and said to him, \'Do you hear the
call to prayer?\' He said, \'Yes.\' He said, \'Then respond to it.\'\"
\[Muslim\]

1067\. \'Abdullah - and it is said \'Amr - ibn Qays, known as Ibn Umm
Maktum, the mu\'adhdhin, said, \"Messenger of Allah, there are many
reptiles and wild beasts in Madina.\" The Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"You hear \'Come to the prayer.
Come to success,\' so come.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1068\. Abu Hurayra reported that Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"By Him in Whose hand my soul is, I
seriously considered ordering someone to collect firewood, ordering the
prayer be called, appointing a man to lead the prayer and then coming up
behind certain men and burning their houses down about them!\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1069\. Ibn Mas\'ud said, \"Anyone who wants to meet Allah tomorrow as a
Muslim should observe these prayers when they are called. Allah has
prescribed the *sunan* of guidance for His Prophet, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, and they are part of the sunan of guidance. If you
prayed them in your houses, like this person who does not come prays in
his house, you would be abandoning the *sunna* of your Prophet. If you
were to abandon the *sunna* of your Prophet, then you would go astray. I
have seen that only hypocrites, whose hypocrisy is known, fail to come.
A man used to be brought to it, supported between two men, until he was
stood up in the prayer line.\" \[Muslim\]

In another variant, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, taught us the *sunan* of guidance, and part of the
*sunan* of guidance is the prayer in the mosque from which the call to
it is given.\"

1070\. Abu\'d-Darda\' said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \'If there are three in a village or
desert and they do not pray (together) Shaytan will overpower them. You
must perform the group prayer. The wolf devours the stray sheep.\" \[Abu
Dawud\]

**192. Chapter: Encouragement to attend the Group Prayers at *Subh* and
*\'Isha\'***

1071\. \'Uthman ibn \'Affan said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \'If someone prays *\'Isha\'*
in a group, it is as if he had prayed half of the night. If someone
prays *Subh* in a group, it is as if he had prayed the entire night.\'\"
\[Muslim\]

1072\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah , may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"And if they only knew what was in
the prayers of *\'Isha\'* and *Subh*, they would come to them even if
they had to crawl.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1073\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"There is no prayer heavier on the hypocrites
than *Fajr* and *\'Isha\'*. If they only knew what is in them, they
would come to them even if they had to crawl.\" \[Agreed upon\]

**193. Chapter: On the command to persevere in the prescribed prayers
and the strongest prohibition against abandoning them**

> Allah says, *\"Safeguard the prayer -- especially the middle one,\"*
> (W2:236; H2:238) and He says, *\"If they repent and establish the
> prayer and pay zakat, let them go on their way.\"* (9:5)

1074\. Ibn Mas\'ud said, \"I asked the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, \'What is the best action?\' He said,
\'The prayer in its time,.\' I said, \'Then what?\' He said,
\'Dutifulness to parents.\' I said, \'Then what?\' He said, \'Jihad in
the way of Allah.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1075\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Islam is based on five: the testimony
that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah, performing the prayer, paying the *zakat*, hajj to the House and
fasting Ramadan.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1076\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"I have been commanded to fight people
until they testify that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is
the Messenger of Allah and establish the prayer and pay the *zakat*. If
they do that, their lives and property are protected from me except for
the right of Islam, and their reckoning is up to Allah.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1077\. Mu\'adh said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, sent me to Yemen and said, \'You are going to a people
who have a Book. When you come to them, call on them to testify that
there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.
If they obey you in respect of that, then tell them that Allah has made
the five prayers obligatory for them every night and day. If they obey
you in respect of that, inform them that Allah has made it obligatory
for zakat to be taken from their property and given to their poor. If
they obey you in respect of that, beware of the things on which people
place great value and beware of the supplication of the wronged. There
is no screen between him and Allah.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1078\. Jabir said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, say, \'All that lies between a man and shirk and
disbelief is abandoning the prayer.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1079\. Burayda reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, said, \"The contract which is between us and them rests on
the prayer. Anyone who abandons it, has rejected belief.\"
\[at-Tirmidhi\]

1080\. Shaqiq ibn \'Abdullah the Follower said, \"The Companions of
Muhammad, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, did not think that
abandoning any action denoted disbelief, except abandoning the prayer.\"
\[at-Tirmidhi\]

1081\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The first action which the slave will
be called to account for on the Day of Rising is his prayer. If it is in
order, he will have success and win through. If it is not in order, he
will be disappointed and lose out. If any of his obligatory prayers are
lacking, the Lord, the Mighty and Exalted, will say, \'See if My slave
has any supererogatory actions and use them to complete his obligatory
prayer.\' Then the rest of his actions will be assessed in the same
way.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

**194. Chapter: On the Excellence of the first row and the command to
complete the first rows and make them straight and close together**

1082\. Jabir ibn Samura said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, came out to us and said, \'Do you not want to
line up as the angels line up in the presence of their Lord?\' We said,
\'Messenger of Allah, how can we line up as the angels line up in the
presence of their Lord?\' He said, \'They fill up the first rows and
press together in them.\" \[Muslim\]

1083\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"If people only knew what was in the
call to prayer and the first row, and could find no other way to get it
than drawing lots for it, they would certainly draw lots for it.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1084\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The best of the rows for the men is the
first row and the worst is the last row. The best of the rows for the
women is the last row and the worst is the first row.\" \[Muslim\]

1085\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, saw people hanging back and he said
to them, \"Come forward and complete the row behind me and let those
behind you complete your row. If people persist in hanging back, Allah
will set them back.\" \[Muslim\]

1086\. Abu Mas\'ud said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, used to put his hand on our shoulders in the prayer
and say, \'Keep straight and do not be disunified or your hearts will
become disunified. Let those among you who have maturity and
intelligence stand nearest to me and then those who are closest to them
and then those closest to them.\" \[Muslim\]

1087\. Anas stated that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Make your rows straight. Straightening the row
is part of the perfection of the prayer.\" \[Agreed upon\]

In a variant of al-Bukhari, \"Straightening the row is part of
establishing the prayer.\"

1088\. Anas said, \"When the iqama for the prayer was given, the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, would turn
round and face us. He said, \'Straighten your rows and stand close
together for I can see you behind my back.\'\" \[al-Bukhari\]

In one variant of al-Bukhari, \"We used to stand shoulder to shoulder
and foot to foot.\"

1089\. An-Nu\'man ibn Bashir who said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \"Make your rows straight
or Allah will cause disagreements between you.\" \[Agreed upon\]

In a variant in Muslim, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, used to straighten our rows to such an extent that
it was as arrows could be straightened by them. This continued until he
saw that we had understood that. Then one day he came out to us and
stood for the prayer until he was about to say the takbir. Then he saw
the chest of a bedouin man protruding from the line. He said, \'Slaves
of Allah! Make your rows straight or Allah will cause disagreements
between you.\'\"

1090\. Al-Bara\' ibn \'Azib said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, used to go between the rows from one end
to the other, pushing our chests and shoulders. He would say, \'Do not
be disunified or your hearts will become disunified.\' He used to say,
\'Allah and the his angels bless the first row.\'\"

1091\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Make the rows straight, stand shoulder
to shoulder and close up the gaps. Give way to your brothers and do not
leave any openings for Shaytan. Allah will connect with anyone who
connects up the row and Allah will break off from anyone who makes a
break in a row.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1092\. Anas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Press together in your rows, drawing close
to one another and making your shoulders touch. By the One in whose hand
my soul is, I see Shaytan coming through the gaps in the row as if he
was a small black goat.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1093\. Anas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Complete the front row and then the one
behind it. The only row to be incomplete should be the last row.\" \[Abu
Dawud\]

1094\. \'A\'isha reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Allah and the angels bless those on the
right hand side of the rows.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1095\. Al-Bara\' said, \"When we prayed behind the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, we wanted to be on his right so
that his face would turn towards us. I heard him say, \'Lord, protect me
from Your punishment on the day You raise up -- or You gather -- Your
slaves.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1096\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Put the Imam in the middle and fill up
the gaps.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

**195. Chapter: The Excellence of doing the *sunnas* with the obligatory
prayers, and clarification of the least of them, the most perfect, and
what is between that**

1097\. Umm Habiba Ramla bint Abi Sufyan said, \"I heard the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \'No Muslim slave
prays to Allah Almighty twelve voluntary *rak\'ats* over and above the
obligatory ones every day without Allah building a house for him in the
Garden (or \"without a house being built for him in the Garden.\")\'\"
\[Muslim\]

1098\. Ibn \'Umar said, \"I prayed with the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, two *rak\'ats* before *Dhuhr* and
two *rak\'ats* after it, two *rak\'ats* after *Jumu\'a*, two *rak\'ats*
after *Maghrib*, and two *rak\'ats* after *\'Isha\'*.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1099\. \'Abdullah ibn Mughaffal stated that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"There is a prayer between
the two *adhans*, there is a prayer between the two *adhans*,\" and then
the third time he said, \"For whoever wishes it.\" \[Agreed upon\]

**196. Chapter: The importance of the two *rak\'ats* which are the sunna
of *Subh***

1100\. \'A\'isha reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, did not fail to pray four *rak\'ats* before *Dhuhr* and
two *rak\'ats* before *Subh*.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1101\. \'A\'isha said, \"The Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, was not more constant in respect of any supererogatory action
than the two *rak\'ats* of *Fajr*.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1102\. \'A\'isha reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"The two *rak\'ats* of *Fajr* are better than
this world and everything it contains.\" \[Muslim\]

In one variant, \"I love them more than the entire world.\"

1103\. Abu \'Abdullah Bilal ibn Rabah, the mu\'adhdhin of the Messenger
of Allah, said that he went to the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, to tell him it was time for the Morning prayer
and \'A\'isha distracted Bilal by something which she asked him to do
until it was well into the time. Bilal stood and announced the prayer to
him and then repeated his announcement. The Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, still did not come out. When he did
come out, he led the people in the prayer, and Bilal informed him that
\'A\'isha had distracted with something she had asked him to do until it
was well into the time and yet he still delayed coming out. He - i.e.
the Prophet said - \'I was doing the two *rak\'ats* of *Fajr*.\' He
said, \'Messenger of Allah, you were well into the time.\' He said, \'If
I had been even further into the time than I was, I would still have
done the two *rak\'ats*. I would have done them well and done them
properly.\'\" \[Abu Dawud\]

**197. Chapter: On two quick *rak\'ats* for *Fajr* and clarification of
what is recited in them and their time**

1104\. \'A\'isha reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to pray two quick *rak\'ats* between the *adhan*
and the *iqama* for the *Subh* prayer.\" \[Agreed upon\]

In one variant of both al-Bukhari and Muslim, \"He used to pray the two
*rak\'ats* of *Fajr* when he heard the *adhan*. He would make them so
short that I would say, \'Did he recite the *Umm al-Qur\'an* \[the
*Fatiha*} in them?\'\"

In a variant of Muslim, \"He used to pray the two *rak\'ats* of Fajr
when he heard the *adhan* and made them short.\" In one variant, \"When
*Fajr* appeared.\"

1105\. Hafsa said that when the *mu\'adhdhin* withdrew to call the adhan
of *Subh* and daybreak appeared, the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, prayed two short *rak\'ats* before the *iqama*
of the prayer was given. \[Agreed upon\]

1106\. Ibn \'Umar said, \"The Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, used to pray the night prayers two by two and then do the *witr*
with one *rak\'at*. He would pray two rak\'ats before the morning prayer
with the *adhan* still echoing in his ears.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1107\. Ibn \'Abbas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, used to recite the following *ayat* from
*al-Baqara* in the first of the two *rak\'ats* of *Fajr*, *\"Say: \'We
believe in Allah and what has been sent down to us\...,\"* (W135; H136),
and in the last, *\"We believe in Allah. Bear witness that we are
Muslims.\"* (W3:51; H3:52)

In one variant, in the last he recited the following ayat from *Ali
\'Imran*, *\"Come to a proposition which is the same for us and you.*\"
(W3:63; H3:64) \[Muslim\]

1108\. Abu Hurayra said that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, recited in the two *rak\'ats* of *Fajr*, *\"Say:
\'Unbelievers!\'\"* (109) and *\"Say: He is Allah, Absolute Oneness.\"*
(112) \[Muslim\]

1109\. Ibn \'Umar said, \"I watched the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, for a month and he used to recite in the two *rak\'ats*
of *Fajr, \'Say: Unbelievers!,\'* and *\'Say: He is Allah, Absolute
Oneness.\'*\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

**198. Chapter: On the recommendation to lie down on the right side
after the two *rak\'ats* of *Fajr* and encouraging doing that whether or
not one has prayed voluntary prayers in the night**

1110\. \'A\'isha said, \"After the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, prayed the two *rak\'ats* of *Fajr*, he would lie down
on his right side.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1111\. \'A\'isha said, \"Between the time he finished the *\'Isha\'*
prayer until *Fajr*, the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, used to pray eleven *rak\'ats*, and he would say the *salam*
after every two *rak\'ats* and perform the *witr* with one. When the
*mu\'adhdhin* fell silent after calling the *Fajr* prayer and the time
of *Fajr* was clear and the *mu\'adhdhin* had come to him, he would do
two quick *rak\'ats* and then lie down on his right side until the
*mu\'adhdhin* came to him for the *iqama*.\" \[Muslim\]

1112\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"When one of you has prayed the two
*rak\'ats* of *Fajr*, he should lie down on his right side.\" \[Abu
Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

**199. Chapter: On the *sunna* of *Dhuhr***

1113\. Ibn \'Umar said, \"I prayed with the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, two *rak\'ats* before *Dhuhr* and
two *rak\'ats* after it.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1114\. \'A\'isha reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, did not fail to pray four *rak\'ats* before *Dhuhr*.\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

1115\. \'A\'isha said, \"The Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, used to pray four *rak\'ats* in my house before *Dhuhr* and then
go out and lead the people in prayer. Then he would come in and pray two
*rak\'ats*. He would lead the people in the *Maghrib* prayer and then
enter and pray two *rak\'ats*. He would lead the people in the
*\'Isha\'* prayer and then enter my house and pray two *rak\'ats*.\"
\[Muslim\]

1116\. Umm Habiba reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Allah will make unlawful for the Fire
anyone who maintains the practice of the fou*r rak\'ats* before *Dhuhr*
and the four after it.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1117\. \'Abdullah ibn as-Sa\'ib reported that the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, used to pray four *rak\'ats*
when the sun began to descend before the *Dhuhr* prayer. He said, \'It
is an hour in which the gates of heaven are opened and I want a
righteous action to ascend for me in it.\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1118\. \'A\'isha reported that when the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, did not pray four *rak\'ats* before *Dhuhr*, he would
pray them after it. \[at-Tirmidhi\]

**200. Chapter: On the *sunna* of *\'Asr***

1119\. \'Ali ibn Abi Talib said, \"The Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to pray four *rak\'ats* before *\'Asr* and would
separate them with a *taslim* to the highest of the angels and all of
the Muslims and believers who follow them.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1120\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"May Allah have mercy on any man who prays four
*rak\'ats* before *\'Asr*.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1121\. \'Ali ibn Abi Talib reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, used to pray two *rak\'ats* before *\'Asr*.
\[Abu Dawud\]

**201. Chapter: On the *sunna* before and after *Maghrib***

1122\. \'Abdullah ibn Mughaffal reported that the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Pray before *Maghrib*,\" and the
third time he said, \"for anyone who wishes to do so.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1123\. Anas said, \"I saw the great Companions of the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, go quickly to the
pillars at *Maghrib*.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1124\. Anas said, \"In the time of the Messenger of Allah, we used to
pray two *rak\'ats* after sunset before *Maghrib*.\" It was said, \"Did
the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, pray
them.\" He said, \"He used to see us pray them and he neither commanded
nor forbade us.\" \[Muslim\]

1125\. Anas said, \"When we were in Madina and the *mu\'adhdhin* gave
the *adhan* for the Maghrib prayer, people would go quickly to the
pillars and do two *rak\'ats*, so that if a man who was a stranger
entered the mosque he would suppose that the prayer had already been
prayed due to the great number of people praying those two *rak\'ats*.\"
\[Muslim\]

**202. Chapter: On the *sunna* before and after *\'Isha\'***

See hadiths 1098 and 1099.

**203. Chapter: The *sunna* of *Jumu\'a***

It contains the previous hadith of Ibn \'Umar (1098).

1126\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"When one of you prays *Jumu\'a,* he
should pray four *rak\'ats* after it.\" \[Muslim\]

1127\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, did not pray after *Jumu\'a* until after he had left.
He would pray two *rak\'ats* in his house. \[Muslim\]

**204. Chapter: The recommendation to pray voluntary prayers at home but
not obligatory prayers. The command to move from the place where one did
the obligatory prayer or to speak before doing the voluntary prayer**

1128\. Zayd ibn Thabit reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"O people, pray in your houses. The best
prayer is a man\'s prayer in his house - except for the obligatory
prayer.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1129\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Do some of your prayers in your houses and do
not make them into graves.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1130\. Jabir reported said that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Any of you who does all his prayers in
the mosque, should do some of them in his house, for Allah will put
blessing in his house on account of his prayer.\" \[Muslim\]

1131\. \'Umar ibn \'Ata\' said that Nafi\' ibn Jubayr sent him to
as-Sa\'ib ibn Ukht Namir to ask him about something that Mu\'awiya had
seen him do in the prayer. He said, \"Yes, I prayed *Jumu\'a* with him
in the enclosure. When the Imam did the *salam*, I stood up where I was
and prayed. When he entered he sent word to me and said, \'Do not do
what you did again. When you have prayed *Jumu\'a*. do not pray another
prayer until you have spoken or gone out. The Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, commanded us to do that, not to do
another prayer after the prayer until we had spoken or gone out.\"
\[Muslim\]

**205. Chapter: On encouraging performance of the *Witr* prayer and
clarification that it is confirmed, and making its time clear**

1132\. \'Ali said, \"The witr is not an obligation like the prescribed
prayer, but it is the *sunna* of the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace. He said, \'Allah is single (*witr*) and loves
odd numbers, so do the *witr*, people of the Qur\'an.\'\"\[Abu Dawud and
at-Tirmidhi\]

1133\. \'A\'isha said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, did the *witr* at all times of the night, at the
beginning of the night, its middle and its end. The latest time he did
his *witr* was just before dawn.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1134\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Make the *witr* the last of your prayers at
night.\"\[Agreed upon\]

1135\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Do the *witr* before you do *Subh*.\"
\[Muslim\]

1136\. \'A\'isha reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to pray at night when she was in front of him.
When only the *witr* remained to do, he would wake her up to do the
*witr*.\" \[Muslim\]

In one variant, \"When only the *witr* remained to do, he said, \'Get up
and do the *witr*, \'A\'isha.\'\"

1137\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Set out to the *Subh* prayer with the *witr*
done.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1138\. Jabir reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who is afraid that he will not get
up at the end of the night should do his *witr* at its beginning. Anyone
who intends to get up at the end of night, should do the *witr* at its
end. The prayer at the end of the night is witnessed, and that is the
best.\" \[Muslim\]

**206. Chapter: The Excellence of the *Duha* prayer, clarification of
its minimum, maximum and middle size, and the encouragement to persevere
in doing it**

1139\. Abu Hurayra said, \"My friend, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, ordered me to do three things: to fast three days every month, to
do the two *rak\'ats* of *Duha* and to do the *witr* before sleeping.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1140\. Abu Dharr reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"*Sadaqa* is owed by every joint you have. Every
glorification is *sadaqa*. Every praise is *sadaqa*. Commanding the
right is *sadaqa*. Forbidding the wrong is *sadaqa*. Praying two
*rak\'ats* in the forenoon (*Duha*) covers all these.\" \[Muslim\]

1141\. \'A\'isha said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to pray four *rak\'ats* for *Duha* and would do
any number more that Allah wished.\" \[Muslim\]

1142\. Umm Hani\' Fakhita bint Abi Talib said, \"I went to the Messenger
of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, in the year of the
Conquest of Makka and found him washing. When he finished washing, he
prayed eight *rak\'ats*. That was in the time of *Duha*.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

**207. Chapter: Permission to pray *Duha* from the time the sun is high
until noon. It is best to pray it when it is very hot and well into
mid-morning**

1143\. Zayd ibn Arqam said that he saw some people praying at the
beginning of the time of *Duha*. He said, \"Do they not know that the
prayer at a later time is better? The Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \'The prayer of the repenters is
when the young camels have become hot from the sun.\'\" \[Muslim\]

**208. Chapter: The encouragement to pray the two *rak\'at* prayer of
greeting when entering the mosque, and it being disliked to sit down
before praying the two *rak\'ats* at whatever time one enters, whether
that be the two *rak\'ats* of greeting, or an obligatory or *sunna*
prayer**

1144\. Abu Qatada reported said that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"When one of you enters the
mosque, he should not sit down until he has prayed two *rak\'ats*.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1145\. Jabir said, \"I once came to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, while he was in the mosque and he said, \'Pray two
*rak\'ats*.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

**209. Chapter: The recommendation to pray two *rak\'ats* after doing
*wudu\'***

1146\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said to Bilal, \"Bilal, tell me that action
that you have done since entering Islam which gives you the most reason
to hope for I heard the sound of your sandals ahead of me in the
Garden.\" He said, \"I have done no action which gives me more reason to
hope than that of never purifying myself at any time of the night or day
without then praying after that purification as much as is written for
me to pray.\" \[Agreed upon\]

**210. Chapter: The excellence of the day of *Jumu\'a*, its obligatory
nature and washing for it, putting on scent and going early to it.
Supplication on Friday and the prayer on the Prophet. Clarification of
the time when supplication is answered. The recommendation of
remembering Allah often after *Jumu\'a***

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Then when the prayer is finished spread
> through the earth and seek Allah\'s bounty and remember Allah much so
> that perhaps you may be successful.\"* (62:10)

1147\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The best day on which the sun has risen
is Friday. On it Adam was created and on it he was admitted to the
Garden and on it he was expelled from it.\" \[Muslim\]

1148\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Whoever does *wudu\'* thoroughly, then
goes to *Jumu\'a*, listens and is silent, will be forgiven until the
next *Jumu\'a* and three days more. Whoever plays with pebbles has
wasted it.\" \[Muslim\]

1149\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"The five prayers and from one *Jumu\'a* to
another and one Ramadan to another expiate what is between them if major
sins are avoided.\" \[Muslim\]

1150\. Abu Hurayra and from Ibn \'Umar said that they heard the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say,
standing on the steps of the minbar, \"People should be wary of avoiding
the *Jumu\'as* or else Allah will put a seal on their hearts and then
they will be among the heedless.\" \[Muslim\]

1151\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"When one of you comes to t*he Jumu\'a*,
he should have a *ghusl* first.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1152\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Doing ghusl on the day o*f
Jumu\'a* is obligatory for every male who has reached puberty.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1153\. Samura reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"If someone does wudu\' on the Day of
*Jumu\'a*, it is by a dispensation and there is a blessing in it but if
someone does *ghusl*, *ghusl* is better.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1154\. Salman reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"When a man does *ghusl* on the day of
*Jumu\'a*, making himself as clean as possible, uses his hair oil or
puts on any perfume he has in his house, then goes out and does not
split up two people, and then prays what is prescribed for him and is
silent while the Imam speaks, he is forgiven everything between then and
the previous *Jumu\'a*.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1155\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who does *ghusl* on the day of
*Jumu\'a*, the same as for *janaba*, and then goes in the first part of
the time, it is as if he has sacrificed a camel. If he goes in the
second part of the time, it is as if he has sacrificed a cow. If he goes
in the third part of the time, it is as if he has sacrificed a horned
ram. If he goes in the fourth part of the time, it is as if he has
sacrificed a hen. If he goes in the fifth part of the time, it is as if
he has sacrificed an egg. When the Imam comes out, the angels settle
down to listen to the reminder.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1156\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, mentioned the day of *Jumu\'a* and said,
\"There is a time during it when Allah Almighty gives to a Muslim
standing in prayer whatever he asks for.\" He indicated how small it was
with his hand. \[Agreed upon\]

1157\. Abu Burda ibn Abi Musa al-Ash\'ari reported that \'Abdullah ibn
\'Umar asked, \"Did you hear your father relate anything from the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, concerning
the special time on the day of *Jumu\'a*?\" He said, \'I replied, \"Yes.
I heard him say that he heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, say, \'It is from the time the Imam sits down
until the prayer is finished.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1158\. Aws ibn Aws reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The best of your days is the day of
*Jumu\'a*, so do a lot of prayer on me during it. Your prayer is
presented to me.\'\" \[Abu Dawud\]

**211. Chapter: On the recommendation to perform the prostration of
gratitude when one obtains a blessing or an affliction is averted**

1159\. Sa\'d ibn Abi Waqqas said, \"We went out with the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, from Makka, making for
Madina. When we were near \'Azwaza\', he dismounted and lifted his hands
and made supplication to Allah for a time and then he went down into
prostration and remained there for a long time. Then he stood and raised
his hands for a long time and then went down into prostration again. He
did that three times. He said, \'I asked my Lord and interceded for my
community, and He gave me a third of my community. So I went down into
prostration to my Lord out of gratitude. Then I lifted my head and asked
my Lord for my community and He gave me another third of my community. I
went down into prostration to my Lord out of gratitude. Then I lifted my
head and asked my Lord for my community and He gave me the last third of
my community so I again went down into prostration to my Lord.\" \[Abu
Dawud\]

**212. Chapter: On the excellence of rising in the night to pray**

> Allah Almighty says*, \"And stay awake for prayer during part of the
> night as a supererogatory action for yourself. It may well be that
> your Lord will raise you to a Praiseworthy Station,\"* (17:79) and the
> Almighty says, *\"Their sides eschew their beds,\"* (32:16) and the
> Almighty says, *\"The part of the night they spent asleep was
> small.\"* (51:17)

1160\. \'A\'isha said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to get up to pray at night to the extent that his
feet became swollen. I said to him, \'Why do you do this, Messenger of
Allah, when you have been forgiven your past and future wrong actions?\'
He said, \'Should I not be a thankful slave?\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1161\. \'Ali reported that one night the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, came to him and Fatima daughter of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, and knocked at their door. \"He
said, \'Do you not pray?\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1162\. Salim ibn \'Abdullah ibn \'Umar ibn al-Khattab reported from his
father that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said, \"\'Abdullah is an excellent man. If only he would pray
during the night.\" Salim said, \"After that \'Abdullah spent very
little of the night asleep.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1163\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr ibn al-\'As said, \"The Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said to me, \"\'Abdullah, do
not be like so-and-so who used to pray at night and then stopped doing
it.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1164\. Ibn Mas\'ud said, \"A man was mentioned in the presence of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, and it was said of him
that he had continued to sleep into the morning without having got up
for the prayer. He said, \'Shaytan urinated in his ears,\' or he said,
\'his ear.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1165\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Shaytan ties three knots at the back of
your necks when you are asleep. He hits every knot saying the words,
\'You have a long night ahead of you so sleep soundly.\' When you wake
up and remember Allah, one knot is undone. When you do *wudu\'*, one
knot is undone. When you pray, one knot is undone. So the morning finds
you cheerful and energetic. Otherwise, the morning will find you lazy
and foul-tempered.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1166\. \'Abdullah ibn Salam reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"O people, make the greeting common
practice and provide food and pray at night while people are asleep, and
you will enter the Garden in safety.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1167\. Abu Hurayra reported said that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"The best fast after Ramadan is
the month of Allah, al-Muharram, and the best prayer after the
obligatory prayer is the night prayer.\" \[Muslim\]

1168\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Night prayers are two by two, and when you are
afraid that the dawn is near, then pray one *rak\'at* as *witr*.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1169\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to pray in the night two by two and then do one
*rak\'at* for *witr*.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1170\. Anas said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used not to fast in a month until we thought that he
would not fast for any of it and he would fast until we thought that he
would not break his fast for any of it. If anyone wanted to see him
praying in the night he could see him doing that or to see him sleeping
he could see him doing that.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1171\. \'A\'isha said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to pray eleven *rak\'ats*. In them he would stay
in *sajda* long enough for one of you to recite fifty ayats before
lifting his head. He would pray two *rak\'ats* before the *Fajr* prayer
and then lie down on his right side until someone came to him to call
him to the prayer.\"\[al-Bukhari\]

1172\. \'A\'isha said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, did not do more than eleven *rak\'ats* (at night)
during Ramadan or at any other time. He would pray four *rak\'ats* - do
not ask about their beauty or length - and then he would pray four
more - and do not ask about their beauty or length - and then he would
pray three. I said, \'Messenger of Allah, do you sleep before the
*witr*?\' He said, \'\'A\'isha, my eyes sleep but my heart does not
sleep.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1173\. \'A\'isha reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to sleep in the first part of the night and stand
in prayer in the last part of it.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1174\. Ibn Mas\'ud said, \"I prayed in the night with the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, and he stood so long that I wanted
to do something awful.\" He was asked, \"What did you want to do?\" He
said, \"I wanted sit down and leave him.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1175\. Hudhayfa said, \"I prayed with the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, one night and he began *al-Baqara*. I said, \'He
will go into *ruku\'* after a hundred.\' He continued and I said, \'He
will pray one *rak\'at* with it.\' But he continued. I said, \'He will
go into *ruku\'* with it.\' Then he began *Surat an-Nisa*\' and recited
it and then began *Ali \'Imran* and recited it. He recited slowly and
when he passed through an *ayat* of glorification, he glorified Allah.
When he passed a question, he asked it. When he passed an *ayat* of
seeking refuge, he sought refuge. Then he went into *ruku\'* and began
to say, \'Glory be to my Lord, the Immense.\' His bowing was about as
long as his standing. Then he said, \'Allah hears whoever praises Him.
Our Lord, yours is the praise.\' Then he stood for a long time, nearly
as long as his bowing. Then he prostrated and said, \'Glory be to my
Lord, the Most High.\' His prostration was almost as long as his
standing.\" \[Muslim\]

1176\. Jabir said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, was asked, \"Which prayer is the best?\" He said, \"A
long *qunut* (i.e. standing).\'\" \[Muslim\]

1177\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr ibn al-\'As reported that the Messenger of
Allah , may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"The prayer
which Allah Almighty loves best was the fast of Da\'ud, and the fast
which Allah Almighty loves best is the prayer of Da\'ud. He used to
sleep half of the night and pray one third of it and then sleep a sixth.
He used to fast one day and break the fast the next day.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1178\. Jabir said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, say, \'There is an hour during the night in which
whatever good of this world and the Next a man asks Allah Almighty for,
He will give it to him. That happens every night.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1179\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"When one of you gets up in the night, he should
begin his prayer with two quick *rak\'ats*.\" \[Muslim\]

1180\. \'A\'isha said, \"When the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, used to get up at night, he would begin his
prayer with two quick *rak\'ats*.\" \[Muslim\]

1181\. \'A\'isha said, \"When the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, missed the prayer in the night due to illness
or some other reason, he would pray twelve rak\'ats during the
daytime.\" \[Muslim\]

1182\. \'Umar ibn al-Khattab reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who sleeps through
his *hizb* or part of it, should recite it between the *Fajr* prayer and
the *Dhuhr* prayer. It will be written for him as if he had recited it
in the night.\" \[Muslim\]

1183\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"May Allah show mercy to a man who gets
up in the night and prays and wakes up his wife, and. if she refuses,
splashes some water in her face. May Allah show mercy to a woman who
gets up in the night and prays and wakes up her husband, and if he
refuses, splashes water in his face.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1184\. Abu Hurayra and Abu Sa\'id stated that the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"When a man wakes up his
wife at night and they pray together - or they pray tw*o rak\'ats*
together - they are written down among \'the men and women who
remember\'.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1185\. \'A\'isha reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"If one of you nods off while he is praying, he
should go and lie down until he is no longer sleepy. If someone prays
when he is drowsy, he may not know whether he is asking for forgiveness
or asking for something bad for himself.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1186\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"When one of you gets up in the night,
and the Qur\'an is unintelligible on his tongue and he does not know
what he is saying, then he should lie down again.\" \[Muslim\]

**213. Chapter: The recommendation to pray at night in Ramadan - that is
the *tarawih* prayers**

1187\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who prays in Ramadan motivated
by belief and in expectation of the reward will be forgiven his past
wrong actions.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1188\. Abu Hurayra said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, used to encourage prayer at night in Ramadan
although he did not command people to do it as a obligatory duty. He
would say, \'Anyone who prays in Ramadan motivated by belief and in
expectation of the reward will be forgiven all his past wrong
actions.\'\" \[Muslim\]

**214. Chapter: On the excellence of praying in the Night of Power**

> Allah says, *\"Truly We sent it down on the Night of Power\"* (97:1)
> to the end of the sura. Allah says, *\"We sent it down on a blessed
> night.\"* (W44:2; H44:3)

1189\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who prays on the Night of Power
motivated by belief and in anticipation of being rewarded will be
forgiven his past wrong actions.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1190\. Ibn \'Umar reported that some of the Companions of the Prophet
were shown in a dream that the Night of Power is during the last seven
days. The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
said, \"I think that your dreams agree about the last seven. Those who
want to look for it, should look for it in the last seven.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1191\. \'A\'isha said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to do *i\'tikaf* in the last ten nights of Ramadan
and he said, \'Look for the Night of Power during the last ten nights of
Ramadan.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1192\. \'A\'isha reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Look for the Night of Power during the
odd nights of the last ten days of Ramadan.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1193\. \'A\'isha said, \"When the last ten days of Ramadan started, the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, used to
pray during the night, wake up his family and intensify his efforts.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1194\. \'A\'isha said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to do night prayers in Ramadan which he did not do
in other months, and in the last ten nights of it what he did not do
during the other nights.\" \[Muslim\]

1195\. \'A\'isha said, \"I said, \'Messenger of Allah, if I know what
night the Night of Power is, what do you think I should say during it?\'
He said, \'Say: \"O Allah, You are Pardoning and you love pardon, so
pardon me.\"\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

**[214. Chapter: The excellence of the siwak and the qualities of the
natural form (*fitra*)]{#fitra}**

1196\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"If it was not for the fact that I might
have been overburdening my community - or the people - I would have
ordered them to use the siwak for every prayer.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1197\. Hudhayfa said, \"When the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, got up in the night, he would rinse out his mouth.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1198\. \'A\'isha said, \"We used prepare the Prophet\'s siwak and
*wudu\'* water and Allah would make him wake for whatever part of the
night He wished, and he would use the siwak and do *wudu\'* and then
pray.\" \[Muslim\]

1199\. Anas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"How many times have I told you about the
siwak!\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1200\. Shurayh ibn Hani\' said, \"I asked \'A\'isha, \'What did the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, do first when he
entered his house?\' She replied, \'Use the siwak.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1201\. Abu Musa al-Ash\'ari said, \"I visited the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, and the end of the siwak was on his
tongue.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1202\. \'A\'isha reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"The siwak is purification for the mouth and
pleasing to the Lord.\" \[an-Nasa\'i\]

1203\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"The natural form of man (*fitra*) involves five
things - or there are five things which are part of the natural form of
man: circumcision, shaving the pubic hair, cutting the nails, removing
hair from the armpits and trimming the moustache.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1204\. \'A\'isha said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \'Ten things make up man\'s natural form:
trimming the moustache, letting the beard grow, using the siwak,
snuffing water up the nose, cutting the nails, washing the knuckles,
removing hair from the armpits, shaving the pubic hair and using water
in the lavatory.\'\" The narrator said, \"I forgot the tenth. It could
be rinsing the mouth.\" \[Muslim\]

1205\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Trim the moustache and let the beard grow.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

**[216. Chapter: Stressing the obligation of *zakat* and clarification
of its excellence and what is connected to it]{#zakat}**

> Allah says, *\"Establish the prayer and pay zakat\"* (W2:42; H2:43)
> and the Almighty says, *\"They were only ordered to worship Allah,
> making their deen sincerely His as people of pure natural belief, and
> to establish the prayer and pay zakat -- that is the correct deen.\"*
> (98:5) He says, *\"Take zakat from their wealth to purify and cleanse
> them.\"* (W9:104; H9:103)

1206\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Islam is based on five: testifying that
there is no god except Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah
(*shahada*); establishing the prayer (*salat*); paying the *zakat*
(poor-tax), the Hajj and the fast (*sawm*) of Ramadan.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1207\. Talha ibn \'Ubaydullah said that a man came to the Messenger of
Allah from the people of Najd. His hair was unkempt. The sound of his
voice could be heard, but they could not understand what he said until
he drew near. He was asking about Islam. The Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"It is five prayers a day.\"
He asked, \"Do I have to do any more?\" He said, \"No, unless you want
to do voluntary prayers.\" The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, then said, \"And you must fast the month of
Ramadan.\" He asked, \"Do I have to do any more?\" He said, \"No, unless
you want to do so voluntarily.\" Then the Messenger of Allah mentioned
*zakat* to him. He said, \"Do I have to do any more?\" He said, \"No,
unless you want to do so voluntarily.\" The man withdrew, saying, \"By
Allah, I will do no more nor less than this.\" The Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"If he is speaking the
truth, he will have success.\" \[i.e. he will be granted Paradise\]
\[Agreed upon\]

1208\. Ibn \'Abbas said, \"The Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, sent Mu\'adh to Yemen and said, \'Call on them to testify
that there is no god but Allah and that I am the Messenger of Allah. If
they comply with that, then let them know that Allah has made the five
prayers obligatory on them every day and night. If they comply with
that, then let them know that Allah has made the payment of *zakat* from
their property obligatory on them, to be taken from the wealthy among
them and given to the poor.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1209\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"I have been commanded to fight people
until they testify that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is
the Messenger of Allah and establish the prayer and pay the *zakat*. If
they do that, their lives and property are protected from me except for
the right of Islam, and their reckoning is up to Allah.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1210\. Abu Hurayra said, \"When the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, died and Abu Bakr was khalifa and those of the
Arabs who were going to reject rejected, \'Umar said, \'How can we fight
people when the Messenger of Allah said, \"I am commanded to fight
people until they say, \'There is no god but Allah.\' Whoever says that,
his property and life are protected from me, except when there is a
legal right to them, and his reckoning is up to Allah.\"?\' Abu Bakr
said, \'By Allah, I will fight anyone who makes a distinction between
prayer and *zakat*! *Zakat* is the right which is due on wealth. By
Allah, if they refuse me a nose-rope which they used to pay to the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, I will
fight them for refusing it!\' \'Umar said, \'By Allah, then I realised
that Allah had expanded Abu Bakr\'s breast in respect of the decision to
fight and I recognised that it was the truth.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1211\. Abu Ayyub reported that a man said to the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, \"Tell me an action which will ensure my
entrance into the Garden.\" He said, \"Worship Allah and do not
associate anything else with him. Establish the prayer and pay the
*zakat* and maintain ties of kinship.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1212\. Abu Hurayra said, \"A bedouin came to the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, and said, \'Tell me an action by which,
if I do it, I will enter the Garden.\' He said, \'Worship Allah and do
not associate anything else with him. Perform the prescribed prayer and
pay the obligatory *zakat*, and fast Ramadan.\' He said, \'By the One
who has my soul in His hand, I will do no more than this.\' When he
turned to go, the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
said, \'Anyone who wants to see one of the people of the Garden should
look at this man.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1213\. Jarir ibn \'Abdullah said, \"I gave allegiance to the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, on the basis of performing the
prayer, paying the *zakat* and giving good counsel to every Muslim.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1214\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"There is no one who has gold or silver
and does not pay what is due on them without them being turned, on the
Day of Rising, into slabs of Fire and being heated in the Fire of
*Jahannam* and his side, forehead and back being branded with them.
Every time they cool they will be heated again throughout a day whose
length is fifty thousand years, until people\'s fates have been decided
and he sees his way open either to the Garden or to the Fire.\" It was
said, \"Messenger of Allah, what about camels?\" He said, \"There is no
owner of camels who fails to fulfil what is due to them, and one of
their rights is to be milked on the day they are watered, without, on
the Day of Rising, being thrown on his face on account of them on a very
wide level plain. Not one young camel will be missing and they will
trample him with their hooves and bite him with their teeth. When the
last of them have passed over him, then the first of them will return to
him throughout a day whose length is fifty thousand years until
people\'s fates have been decided and he sees his way open either to the
Garden or to the Fire.\"

It was asked, \"Messenger of Allah, and what about cattle and sheep?\"
He said, \"There is no owner of cattle or sheep who fails to fulfil what
is due to them, without, on the Day of Rising, being thrown on his face
on account of them on a very wide level plain. Not one of them will be
missing. None of them will have curved horns or no horns or broken
horns. They will gore him with their horns and trample him with their
hooves. When the last of them have passed over him, then the first of
them will return to him in a day whose length is fifty thousand years
until people\'s fates have been decided and he sees his way open either
to the Garden or to the Fire.\"

It was asked, \"Messenger of Allah, what about horses?\" He said,
\"There are three kinds of horses: those which are a burden for a man,
those which are a protection for a man and those which contain a reward
for a man. Those which are a burden for a man are those which are kept
just for showing off, boastfulness and out of enmity against the people
of Islam. They are a burden. Those which are a protection for a man are
those a man keeps in the way of Allah without forgetting Allah\'s right
in respect of their backs and necks. They are a protection for him. As
for those which contain a reward for him, they are those which a man
keeps in meadows or grasslands in the way of Allah for the people of
Islam. For anything they eat of that meadow or grassland there are good
deeds written for him for what they ate and good deeds for their
droppings and urine. If one of them breaks its tether and goes over a
hillock or two, its tracks and droppings are also good deeds for him. If
it crosses a river and drinks from it when he had not intended to allow
it to drink from it, Allah writes for him the amount it drinks as good
deeds for him.\"

It was asked, \"Messenger of Allah, what about donkeys?\" He said,
\"Nothing has been revealed to me about donkeys except for this unique,
comprehensive verse, *\'Whoever does an atom\'s weight of good will see
it. Whoever does an atom\'s weight of evil will see it.\'* (99:7-8)\"
\[Agreed upon\]

**[217. Chapter: On the obligation to fast Ramadan and clarification of
the excellence of fasting and what is connected to it]{#fast}**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"You who believe! Fasting is prescribed for
> you, as it was prescribed for those before you..\"* to His words
> *\"The month of Ramadan is the one in which the Qur\'an was sent down
> as guidance for mankind, with Clear Signs containing guidance and
> discrimination. Any of you who are resident for the month should fast
> it. But any of you who are ill or on a journey should fast a number of
> other days.\"* (W2:182-184; H2:183-185)

1215\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Allah, the Mighty and Exalted said,
\'Every action of the son of Adam is for himself except for fasting. It
is Mine and I repay it.\' Fasting is a shield. When someone is fasting,
he should not have sexual relations nor quarrel. If someone fights him
or insults him, he should say, \'I am fasting\'. By the One in whose
hand the self of Muhammad is, the changed breath in the mouth of the
faster is more fragrant to Allah than the scent of musk. The faster
experiences two joys: when he breaks his fast he rejoices and when he
meets his Lord he rejoices in his fasting.\" \[Agreed upon\]

In one variant of al-Bukhari, \"He has left his food and drink and
appetites for My sake. Fasting is Mine and I repay it. Any other good
deed I repay with ten like it.\"

In a variant of Muslim, \"Every action of the son of Adam is multiplied.
A good action receives from ten to seven hundred times. Allah Almighty
said, \"Fasting is Mine and I repay it. He leaves his appetites and food
for My sake. The faster experiences two joys: a joy when he breaks his
fast and a joy when he meets his Lord. The changed breath in the mouth
of the faster is more fragrant to Allah than the scent of musk.\"

1216\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The one who spends out two kinds of
actions in the way of Allah will be summoned from the gates of the
Garden and told, \'O slave of Allah this is better.\' All the people who
did the prayer will be called from the gate of the prayer. All the
people who did jihad will be called from the gate of jihad. All the
people who fasted will be called from the gate of Rayyan. All the people
who gave sadaqa will be called from the gate of sadaqa.\" Abu Bakr said,
\"May my father and mother be sacrificed for you, Messenger of Allah. No
one called from those gates will feel distress. Will anyone be called
from all those gates?\" He said, \"Yes, and I hope that you will be
among them.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1217\. Sahl ibn Sa\'d reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"There is a gate in the Garden called ar-Rayyan
which those who fast will enter on the Day of Rising, and none but they
will enter it.\" It will be said, \'Where are the fasters?\' They will
stand up and none but they will enter it. When they have entered it, it
will be closed and no one else will enter it.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1218\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"No slave fasts one day in
the way of Allah without Allah putting his face seventy years\' journey
away from the Fire on account of that day.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1219\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who prays in Ramadan motivated
by belief and in expectation of the reward will be forgiven his past
wrong actions.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1220\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"When Ramadan comes, the gates of the
Garden are opened, the gates of the Fire are closed and the shaytans are
chained up.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1221\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Fast when you see it (the new moon) and
break the fast when you see it. If it is cloudy, then make Sha\'ban
complete with thirty days.\" \[Agreed upon\]

In the variant of Muslim, \"If it is cloudy, you must fast thirty
days.\"

**218. Chapter: On generosity, charity and doing much good in the month
of Ramadan, and increasing that in the last ten days of the month**

1222\. Ibn \'Abbas said, \"The Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, was the most generous of people, and he was even more
generous during Ramadan when Jibril met him. Jibril used to meet him
every night in Ramadan until it was over and the Prophet would go
through the Qur\'an with him. The Messenger of Allah was more generous
with good things than the blowing wind.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1223\. \'A\'isha said, \"When the last ten days of Ramadan started, the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, used to
pray during the night, wake up his family and intensify his efforts.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

**219. Chapter: On the prohibition against fasting before Ramadan after
the middle of Sha\'ban unless that fasting is connected to what is
before it and coincides with his habit, like fasting Monday and
Thursday**

1224\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"None of you should fast a day or two before
Ramadan except for a man who customarily fasts. He should fast that
day.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1225\. Ibn \'Abbas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Do not fast immediately before Ramadan.
Fast when you see the new moon and break it when you see it. If cloud
obscures it, then complete the thirty days.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1226\. Abu reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"When half of Sha\'ban remains, then do not
fast.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1227\. Abu\'l-Yaqatan \'Ammar ibn Yasir said, \"Anyone who fasts the day
which is doubtful has rebelled against Abu\'l-Qasim.\" \[Abu Dawud and
at-Tirmidhi\]

**220. Chapter: On what one says when seeing the new moon**

1228\. Talha ibn \'Ubaydullah reported that When the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, saw the new moon, he would say, \"O
Allah, make the new moon shine on us with security, belief, safety and
Islam! My Lord and your Lord is Allah. It is a new moon of guidance and
good.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

**221. Chapter: The excellence of *suhur* and delaying it as long as one
does not fear the approach of dawn**

1229\. Anas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Have *suhur*. There is blessing in
*suhur*.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1230\. Zayd ibn Thabit said, \"We used to have *suhur* with the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace. Then he stood up for the
prayer.\" Anas said, \"I said, \'How long was there between the *adhan*
and *suhur*?\' He said, \'Enough to recite fifty ayats.\'\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1231\. Ibn \'Umar said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, had two *mu\'adhdhans*: Bilal and Ibn Umm Maktum.
The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said,
\"Bilal calls the *adhan* while it is still night, so eat and drink
until Ibn Umm Maktum calls the *adhan*.\" He said, \"The time between
the two *adhans* was only long enough for the one to go up and the other
to come down.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1232\. \'Amr ibn al-\'As reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"The difference between our
fasting and the fasting of the people of the Book lies in the eating of
*suhur*.\" \[Muslim\]

**222. Chapter: On the excellence of hastening to break the fast and
that with which one breaks the fast and what one says after breaking the
fast**

1233\. Sahl ibn Sa\'d reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"People will continue to be all
right as long as they hurry to break the fast.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1234\. Abu \'Atiyya said, \"Masruq and I visited \'A\'isha and Masruq
said to her, \'There are two of the Companions of Muhammad, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, and neither of them is lacking in good.
One of them hastens *Maghrib* and fast-breaking and the other delays
*Maghrib* and fast-breaking.\' She said, \'Which one hastens *Maghrib*
and fast-breaking?\' He said, \'\'Abdullah - i.e. ibn Mas\'ud.\' She
said, \'That is what the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, did.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1235\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Allah, the Mighty and Majestic said,
\'The most beloved of My slaves to Me is the quickest to break the
fast.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1236\. \'Umar ibn al-Khattab reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"When night advances from
here and day retreats from there and the sun sets, then people fasting
should break their fast.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1237\. Abu Ibrahim \'Abdullah ibn Abi Awfa said, \"We were with the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, on a
journey while he was fasting. When the sun set, he said to someone,
\'So-and-so, get down and mix some *sawiq* for us\' He said, \'Messenger
of Allah, won\'t you let it get dark?\' He said, \'Get down and mix some
*sawiq* for us.\' He said, \'It is still daytime.\' He said, \'Get down
and mix some *sawiq* for us.\' So he got down and mixed it for them. The
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, drank and
then gestured with his hand towards the east, saying, \'When you see the
night advancing from here, then the faster should break his fast.\'\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1238\. Salman ibn \'Amir ad-Dabi the Companion reported that the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"When one of
you breaks his fast, he should break it with dates. If he cannot find
any. then he should break it with water. It is pure.\" \[Abu Dawud and
at-Tirmidhi\]

1239\. Anas said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to break the fast with fresh dates before he
prayed, and if there were no fresh dates, then with small dry dates. If
there were no dry dates, then with a few sips of water.\" \[Abu Dawud
and at-Tirmidhi\]

**223. Chapter: On commanding the faster to guard his tongue and limbs
from incorrect actions, verbal abuse and the like**

1240\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"When someone is fasting, he should not
have sexual relations nor quarrel. If someone fights him or insults him,
he should say, \'I am fasting\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1241\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Allah does not require someone who does not
abandon lies, and acting by them, while fasting to abandon his food and
drink.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

**224. Chapter: On questions regarding fasting**

1242\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"If someone forgets, and eats and drinks, he
should complete his fast. Allah has fed him and let him drink.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1243\. Laqit ibn Sabira said, \"I said, \'Messenger of Allah, tell me
about *wudu\'*.\' He said, \'Do *wudu\'* thoroughly letting the water
run between your fingers and snuffing the water well up your nose,
unless you are fasting.\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1244\. \'A\'isha who said, \"*Fajr* used sometimes to find the Messenger
of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, junub from one of his
wives. Then he did *ghusl* and fasted.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1245\. \'A\'isha and Umm Salama said, \"When morning found the Messenger
of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, *junub* from one of
his wives, he would still fast.\" \[Agreed upon\]

**225. Chapter: Clarification of the excellence of fasting Muharram,
Sha\'ban and the sacred months**

1246\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The best fast after Ramadan is the
month of Allah, al-Muharram. The best prayer after the obligatory prayer
is the night prayer.\" \[Muslim\]

1247\. \'A\'isha said, \"The Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, did not fast in any month more than Sha\'ban. He used to fast all
of Sha\'ban.\" In one variant, \"He used to fast Sha\'ban except for a
little.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1248\. Mujiba al-Bahiliyya about her father or her uncle, \"He went to
the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, and
then went to him again a year later when his circumstances and
appearance had changed. He said, \'Messenger of Allah, do you not
recognise me?\' He said, \'Who are you?\' He said, \'I am the Bahili who
came to you last year.\' He said, \'What has changed you? You had a
handsome appearance.\' He said, \'I have only eaten at night since I
left you.\' The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said, \'You have tortured yourself!.\' Then he said, \'Fast the
month of endurance \[Ramadan\] and one day every month.\' He said, \'Let
me do more. I have strength.\' He said, \'Fast two days.\' He said,
\'Let me do more.\' He said, \'Fast three days.\' He said, \'Let me do
more.\' He said, \'Fast in the sacred months and stop. Fast in the
sacred months and stop. Fast in the sacred months and stop.\' He spoke
with three fingers, putting them together and then releasing them.\'\"
\[Abu Dawud\]

**226. Chapter: The excellence of fasting and other things in the first
10 days of Dhu\'l-Hijja**

1249\. Ibn \'Abbas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"No virtuous actions done during any ten
days are better liked by Allah than the actions done on these days (the
first ten days of Dhu\'l-Hijja).\" They said, \"Messenger of Allah, not
even jihad in the way of Allah?\" He said, \"Not even jihad in the way
of Allah, except for a man who goes out putting his life and property in
danger and returns with nothing.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

**227. Chapter: On the excellence of fasting the Day of \'Arafa,
\'Ashura\' and the ninth of Muharram**

1250\. Abu Qatada said \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, was asked about fasting the Day of \'Arafat. He said,
\'It expiates the past year and coming year.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1251\. Ibn \'Abbas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, fasted the Day of \'Ashura\' and ordered it to
be fasted. \[Agreed upon\]

1252\. Abu Qatada reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, was asked about fasting the Day of \'Ashura\'
and said, \"It expiates the past year.\" \[Muslim\]

1253\. Ibn \'Abbas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"If I remain alive until next year, I
will fast the ninth.\" \[Muslim\]

**228. Chapter: On the recommendation to fast six days of Shawwal**

1254\. Abu Ayyub reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who fasts Ramadan and then
follows it with six from Shawwal, it is as he had fasted the entire
year.\" \[Muslim\]

**229. Chapter: On the recommendation to fast Mondays and Thursdays**

1255\. Abu Qatada reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, was asked about fasting Mondays and he said,
\"That is the day on which I was born and the day when I was sent - or
when revelation descended on me.\" \[Muslim\]

1256\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Actions are presented on Mondays and
Thursdays, so I like my actions to be presented while I am fasting.\"
(Muslim related it without mentioning fasting.) \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1257\. \'A\'isha said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to take care to fast on Mondays and Thursdays.\"
\[at-Tirmidhi\]

**230. Chapter: On the recommendation to fast three days of every
month**

It is best to fast the \'white days\', which are the thirteenth,
fourteenth and fifteenth.

1258\. Abu Hurayra said, \"My friend, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, ordered me to do three things: to fast three days every month, to
do the two *rak\'ats* of *Duha* and to do the *witr* before sleeping.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1259\. Abu\'d-Darda\' said, \"My beloved, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, commanded me to do three things which I will not forego as
long as I live: to fast three days of every month, to pray *Duha*, and
not to sleep until after praying the witr.\" \[Muslim\]

1260\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr ibn al-\'As reported said that the Messenger
of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Fasting three
days every month is equivalent to fasting continuously.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1261\. Mu\'adha al-\'Adawiyya asked \'A\'isha , \"Did the Messenger of
Allah fast three days of every month?\" She said, \"Yes.\" \"I said,
\'What part of the month did he fast?\' She said, \'He did not care what
part of the month he fasted.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1262\. Abu Dharr reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"If you fast three days of the month,
then fast the thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1263\. Qatada ibn Milhan said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, used to command us to fast the white days: the
thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1264\. Ibn \'Abbas said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, did not fail to fast the white days either when at
home or on a journey.\" \[an-Nasa\'i\]

**231. Chapter: On the excellence giving the faster something with which
to break the fast, and the excellence of the faster when people eat in
his presence and the supplication of the one who eats for what is
eaten**

1265\. Zayd ibn Khalid al-Juhani reported that the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Whoever gives a faster something
with which to break his fast has the same reward without that
diminishing the reward of the faster in any way.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1266\. Umm \'Umara al-Ansariyya reported that the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, visited her and she presented him with
some food. He said, \"Eat.\" She said, \"I am fasting.\" The Messenger
of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"The angels
pray for blessing on a fasting person when people eat in his presence
until they finish.\" Perhaps he said, \"Until they are full.\"
\[at-Tirmidhi\]

1267\. Anas reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, visited Sa\'d ibn \'Ubada, who brought some bread and oil, and he
ate. Then the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said,
\"Those who were fasting have broken the fast with you and the pious
have eaten your food and the angels prayed for blessings on you.\" \[Abu
Dawud\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Previous Page](riyad5.html)**

**[Next Page](riyad7.html)**

[**Return to Home Page**](index.html)
