**[232. Book of *I\'tikaf*]{#retreat}**

1268\. Ibn \'Umar said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, used to do *i\'tikaf* for the last ten days of
Ramadan.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1269\. \'A\'isha reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to do *i\'tikaf* for the last ten days of Ramadan
until Allah Almighty caused him to die. Then his wives did *i\'tikaf*
after him. \[Agreed upon\]

1270\. Abu Hurayra said, \"The Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, used to do *i\'tikaf* for ten days every Ramadan. In the year
in which he died he did *i\'tikaf* for twenty days.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

**[233. Book of Hajj]{#hajj}**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Hajj to the House is a duty owed to Allah by
> all mankind -- those who can find a way to do it. But if anyone
> rejects, Allah is Rich beyond need of any being.\"* (3:97)

1271\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, god but Allah and that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah, performing the prayer, paying the zakat, hajj to the
House and fasting Ramadan.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1272\. Abu Hurayra said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, addressed us and said, \'O people. Allah has made
the hajj obligatory for you, so go on hajj.\' A man said, \'Every year,
Messenger of Allah?\' He was silent until the man had said it three
times. The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
then said, \'If I said yes, it would become obligatory and you would be
unable to do it.\' Then he said, \'Let me be when I refrain from
mentioning something to you. Those before you were destroyed by the
quantity of their questions and their disagreement with their Prophets.
When I command you to do something, then do it as much as you can. When
I forbid you to do something, then leave off doing it.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1273\. Abu Hurayra said that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, was asked, \"What action is the best?\" He replied, \"Belief
in Allah and His Messenger.\" He was asked, \"Then what?\" and replied,
\"Jihad in the way of Allah.\" He was asked, \"And then what?\" He
replied, \"An accepted hajj.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1274\. Abu Hurayra said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \'Whoever goes on hajj for Allah
alone and does not have sexual intercourse or commit any outrage will
return as he was on the day his mother bore him.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1275\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"From one \'umra to the next is
expiation for everything in between them and there is no reward for an
accepted hajj other than the Garden.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1276\. \'A\'isha, Umm al-Mu\'minin, said, \"Messenger of Allah, we see
that jihad is the best action so should we not do jihad?\" He said,
\"No. However, the best jihad is an accepted hajj.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1277\. \'A\'isha reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"There is no day on which Allah frees
more slaves from the Fire than the Day of \'Arafat.\" \[Muslim\]

1278\. Ibn \'Abbas reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"An *\'umra* in Ramadan is equivalent to hajj -
or a hajj with me.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1279\. Ibn \'Abbas reported that a woman said, \"Messenger of Allah,
Allah has made going on hajj obligatory for His slaves and my father is
a very old man and cannot remain firm in his seat when riding. Can I go
on hajj for him?\" He said, \"Yes.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1280\. Laqit ibn \'Amir reported that he came to the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, and said, \"My father is an old man who
cannot do hajj o*r \'umra* nor travel.\" He said, \"Do hajj and \'umra
for your father.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1281\. As-Sa\'ib ibn Yazid said, \"I was taken on hajj with the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, in the
Farewell Hajj when I was seven years old.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1282\. Ibn \'Abbas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, met a group of people at ar-Rawha\' and said,
\"Who are these people?\" They said, \"Muslims.\" and then asked, \"Who
are you?\" He said, \"The Messenger of Allah.\" A woman lifted up a
child and said, \"Can this one go on hajj?\" He said, \"Yes, and you
will have the reward.\" \[Muslim\]

1283\. Anas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, went on hajj on a camel which was his pack-animal.
\[al-Bukhari\]

1284\. Ibn \'Abbas said, \"\'Ukaz, Majanna and al-Majaz were markets in
the time of Jahiliyya and it was considered a sin to trade there during
the festival. It was revealed. *\'There is nothing wrong in seeking the
bounty from your Lord.\'* (W2:197; H2:198) during the festival of
hajj.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

[Book of Jihad]{#jihad}

**234. The excellence of Jihad**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"But fight the idolaters totally just as they
> fight you totally, and know that Allah is with the godfearing,\"*
> (9:36) and the Almighty says, *\"Fighting is prescribed for you even
> if it is hateful to you. It may be that you hate a thing when it is
> good for you and it may be that you love a thing when it is bad for
> you. Allah knows and you do not know.\"* (W2:214; H2:216) The Almighty
> says, *\"Go out to fight, whatever your circumstances or desires, and
> do jihad with your wealth and yourselves in the way of Allah,\"*
> (9:41) and the Almighty says, *\"Allah has bought from the believers
> their selves and their wealth in return for them having the Garden.
> They fight in the way of Allah, and they kill and are killed. It is a
> promise binding on Him in the Torah, the Injil and the Qur\'an and who
> is truer to his contract than Allah? Rejoice then in the bargain you
> have made. That is the great victory.\"* (9:111) The Almighty says,
> *\"Those believers who stay behind -- other than those forced by
> necessity -- are not the same as those who do jihad in the way of
> Allah, sacrificing their wealth and themselves. Allah has given those
> who do jihad with their wealth and themselves a higher rank than those
> who stay behind. Allah has promised the Best to both, but Allah has
> preferred those who do jihad over those who stay behind by an immense
> reward: high ranks conferred by Him as well as forgiveness and mercy.
> Allah is Ever-Forgiving, Most Merciful.\"* (4:95-96) The Almighty
> says, *\"O you who believe! Shall I direct you to a transaction which
> will save you from a painful punishment? That you believe in Allah and
> His Messenger and do jihad in the Way of Allah with your wealth and
> yourselves. That is better for you if you only knew. He will forgive
> you your wrong actions and admit you into Gardens with rivers flowing
> under them, and fine dwellings in the Gardens of Eden. That is the
> Great Victory. And other things you love: support from Allah and
> imminent victory. Give good news to the believers!\"* (61:10-13)

1285\. Abu Hurayra said that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, was asked, \"What action is the best?\" He replied, \"Belief
in Allah and His Messenger.\" He was asked, \"Then what?\" and replied,
\"Jihad in the way of Allah.\" He was asked, \"And then what?\" He
replied, \"An accepted hajj.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1286\. Ibn Mas\'ud said, \"I said, \'Messenger of Allah, what action is
most loved by Allah Almighty?\' He said, \'The prayer at its proper
time.\' I asked, \'Then what?\' He said, \'Then devotion to parents.\'
He said, Then what?\' He said, \'Jihad in the way of Allah.\'\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1287\. Abu Dharr said, \"I said, \'Messenger of Allah, what action is
best?\' He said, \'Belief in Allah and jihad in His way.\'\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1288\. Anas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"A morning spent in the way of Allah or an
evening is better than this world and everything it contains.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1289\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri said, \"A man said, \'Messenger of Allah,
who is the best of people?\' The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \'A believer who does jihad in the way of
Allah with his self and his wealth.\' They said, \'Then who?\' He said,
\'A man who withdraws into a mountain ravine and worships his Allah and
spares people from his evil.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1290\. Sahl ibn Sa\'d reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Manning the frontier (*ribat*)
for one day in the way of Allah is better than this world and everything
in it. The place in the Garden of one of your whips is better than this
world and everything in it. Any evening or a morning when a slave goes
out in the way of Allah Almighty is better than this world and
everything in it.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1291\. Salman said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, say, \"Fighting on the front line (*ribat*) for
a day and a night is better than fasting and praying at night for a
month. If a man dies doing it, the actions which he used normally to do
go on accruing for him and his provision is bestowed on him and he will
be safe from the trials of the grave.\" \[Muslim\]

1292\. Fadala ibn \'Ubayd reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"The actions of every dead
person are sealed except for the *murabit* in the way of Allah. His
actions will go on increasing until the Day of Rising. and he will be
safe from the trials of the grave.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1293\. \'Uthman said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, say, \"Fighting on the front line (*ribat*) in
the way of Allah is better than a thousand years doing anything else.\"
\[at-Tirmidhi\]

1294\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Allah gives a guarantee to the one who
goes out in the way of Allah: \'I will repay anyone who goes out for no
other reason than jihad in My way and belief in Me and affirmation of My
Messengers either by admitting him into the Garden or returning him to
his home from which he left with the reward he has obtained or booty.\'
By the One in whose hand the soul of Muhammad is, on the Day of Rising
every wound which a Muslim receives in the way of Allah will be as it
was when it was inflicted. Its colour will be that of blood, but its
scent will be that of musk. By the One in whose hand the soul of
Muhammad is, if it were not that it would be a source of difficulty for
the Muslims, I would never stay behind from any expedition in the way of
Allah. But I have not got the means to provide the people with mounts
and they do not have the means either and it would be hard for them to
stay behind if I went. By the One in whose hand the soul of Muhammad is,
I would love to raid in the way of Allah and be killed, and then raid
and be killed again, and then raid and be killed again.\" \[Muslim\]

1295\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Every one who is wounded will come of
the Day of Rising with his wound bleeding. It will be the colour of
blood but have the scent of musk.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1296\. Mu\'adh reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, said, \"If any Muslim man fights in the way of Allah even for
a short time, the Garden becomes mandatory for him. If anyone suffers a
wound or some disaster in the way of Allah, it will appear on the Day of
Rising pouring blood as it did when it first happened: its colour will
be saffron and its scent like musk.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1297\. Abu Hurayra said, \"One of the Companions of the Messenger of
Allah passed by a ravine which had a small spring of sweet water in it
and he admired it. He said, \'If only I could withdraw from people and
stay in this ravine! But I will not do it until I have asked the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, for
permission.\' He mentioned it to the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, and he said, \'Do not do it. The station of one
of you in the way of Allah is better than his prayer in his house for
seventy years. Would you not like Allah to forgive you and admit you
into the Garden? Raid in the way of Allah. If anyone fights in the way
of Allah for even a short time, the Garden becomes mandatory for
him.\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1298\. Abu Hurayra said, \"It was said, \'Messenger of Allah, what is
equal to jihad in the way of Allah?\' He said, \'You will not be able to
do it.\' They repeated it to him twice or three times, and each time he
said, \"You will not be able to do it.\' Then he said, \'Someone who
does jihad in the way of Allah is like someone who fasts and prays at
night in obedience to the verses of Allah without slackening in his
prayer or his fast until the one doing jihad in the way of Allah
returns.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

In the variant of al-Bukhari, \"A man said, \'Messenger of Allah, direct
me to an action which is equal to jihad.\' He said, \'I do not know of
one.\' Then he said, \'Are you capable, when the person doing jihad sets
out, of entering your mosque and then praying without slackening off and
fasting without breaking the fast?\' He said, \'Who could possibly do
that!\'\"

1299\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"One of the best of livelihoods that
people can have is that of a man who holds the reins of his horse in the
way of Allah, hastening on its back, and whenever he hears the sound of
war or alarm, he flies to it looking for either the killing or the death
that he will find there, or that of a man among some sheep at the top of
one of these mountains or in the bottom of one of these valleys who
establishes the prayer and pays the zakat and worships Allah until
certainty (death) comes to him. He does not involve himself with people
except in a good way.\" \[Muslim\]

1300\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"In the Garden there are a hundred
degrees which Allah has prepared for those who do jihad in the way of
Allah. Between each two degrees is the space between heaven and earth.\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

1301\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said. \"The Garden is mandatory for
anyone who is pleased with Allah as Lord, Islam as deen and Muhammad as
Messenger.\" Abu Sa\'id was amazed at it and said, \"Repeat that to me,
Messenger of Allah.\" and he repeated it to him and then said, \"There
is something else by which Allah raises the slave a hundred degrees in
the Garden, the distance between each of which is as great as the space
between heaven and earth.\" He said, \"What is it, Messenger of Allah?\"
He said, \"Jihad in the way of Allah. Jihad in the way of Allah.\"
\[Muslim\]

1302\. Abu Bakr ibn Abi Musa al-Ash\'ari said, \"I heard my father say
when he was in the presence of the enemy, \'The Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"The gates of the Garden are
under the shadow of the swords.\"\' A man of ragged appearance stood up
and said, \'Abu Musa, did you really hear the Messenger of Allah say
this?\' He said, \'Yes.\' He returned to his companions and said, \'I
give the greeting to you.\' Then he broke his sword\'s scabbard, threw
it away and walked with his sword towards the enemy, striking with it
until he was killed.\" \[Muslim\]

1303\. Abu \'Abs \'Abdu\'r-Rahman ibn Jabr stated that the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"The Fire will
not touch anyone whose feet become dusty in the way of Allah \"
\[al-Bukhari\]

1304\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"No man who weeps out of fear of Allah
will enter the Fire until the milk returns to the breast. Dust raised in
the way of Allah and the smoke of Hellfire will never be joined together
in respect of any slave of Allah.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1305\. Ibn \'Abbas said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \'There are two eyes which the Fire
will not touch: an eye which weeps out of fear of Allah and an eye that
keeps watch in the way of Allah.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1306\. Zayd ibn Khalid reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who equips someone for an
expedition in the way of Allah has gone on the expedition. Anyone who
looks after someone\'s family has gone on the expedition.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1307\. Abu Umama reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The best sadaqa is the shade of a tent
in the way of Allah, the gift of a servant in the way of Allah or giving
a male camel in the way of Allah.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1308\. Anas reported that a lad from Aslam said, \"Messenger of Allah, I
want to go on an expedition, but I do not have the wherewithal with
which to prepare myself. He said, \'Go to so-and-so. He has made
preparations but has fallen ill.\' He said, \'The Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, greets you and says to give me
what you have prepared.\' He said, \'Girl, give him what I have prepared
and do not hold anything back. By Allah, you should not hold back any of
it and it will be a blessing for you.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1309\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, sent an expedition to the Banu
Lihyan of Hudhayl. He said, \"Let every two men send one more man, and
the reward will be for both of them.\" \[Muslim\]

In one variant, \"One man out of every two men should go out.\" Then he
said to the one sitting, \"Whichever of you looks after the family and
property of the one who goes out will have half the reward of the one
who goes out.\"

1310\. Al-Bara\' said, \"A man bristling with armour came to the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, and said, \'Messenger
of Allah, shall I fight or become Muslim?\' He said, \'Become Muslim and
then fight.\' He became Muslim and then fought and was killed.\' The
Messenger of Allah said, \'His action was little but his reward is
great.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1311\. Anas reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said, \"No one will enter the Garden and then want to return to
this world, even if he had everything that is on the earth, except for a
martyr who wants to return to this world and be killed ten times more
because of the honour he experiences.\"

In one variant, \"Because of the excellence of martyrdom he
experiences.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1312\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr ibn al-\'As reported that the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Allah forgives
the martyr every wrong action except debt.\" (In one variant, \"Being
killed in the way of Allah expiates everything except debt.\")
\[Muslim\]

1313\. Abu Qatada reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, stood up among them and mentioned that jihad in
the way of Allah and belief in Allah were the best actions. A man stood
up and said, \"Messenger of Allah, tell me, if I am killed in the way of
Allah, will that expiate my sins for me?\" The Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said to him, \"Yes, if you are
killed in the way of Allah and you are steadfast, expecting Allah\'s
reward, advancing and not retreating.\" Then the Messenger of Allah
said, \"What did you say?\" He said, \"Tell me, if I am killed in the
way of Allah, will that expiate my sins for me?\" The Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Yes, if you are
killed in the way of Allah and you are steadfast, expecting Allah\'s
reward, advancing and not retreating - except if you have debts. Jibril,
peace be upon him, said that to me.\" \[Muslim\]

1314\. Jabir reported that a man said, \"Where will I be, Messenger of
Allah, if I am killed?\" He said, \"In the Garden.\" He threw away some
dates that were in his hand and then fought until he was killed.\"
\[Muslim\]

1315\. Anas said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, and his Companions advanced so that they reached Badr
before the idolaters. Then the idolaters arrived. The Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \'None of you
should advance to anything unless I go first.\' The idolaters drew near
and the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
said, \'Rise up for a Garden whose breadth is that of the heavens and
the earth.\' \'Umayr ibn al-Humam al-Ansari said, \'Messenger of Allah,
a Garden whose breadth is that of the heavens and the earth?\' He said,
\'Yes.\' He said, \'Excellent! excellent!\' The Messenger of Allah said,
\'What moved you to say, \'Excellent! excellent!\'\" He said, \"By
Allah, Messenger of Allah, nothing but the hope that I will be among its
people!\' He said, \'You are among its people.\' He took some dates from
his quiver and began to eat some of them. Then he said, \"If I live long
enough to eat these dates, it will indeed be a long life!\" He threw
away the dates he had and then fought until he was killed.\" \[Muslim\]

1316\. Anas said, \"Some people came to the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, saying, \'Send us some men to teach us the Qur\'an
and the Sunna.\' He sent them seventy men of the Ansar who were called
\"the reciters\". They included my uncle Hiram. During the night they
used to recite the Qur\'an and study and learn. During the day they
would fetch water and put it in the mosque and fetch firewood and sell
it and use the proceeds to buy food for the people of the Suffa and the
poor. The Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, sent them
and they were attacked and killed before they had reached the place.
They said, \'O Allah, convey from us to our Prophet that we have met You
and we are pleased with You and You are pleased with us.\' A man came to
Hiram, Anas\'s uncle, from behind and stabbed him with a spear so that
it went right through him. Hiram said, \'I have won, by the Lord of the
Ka\'ba!\' The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said, \'Your brothers have been killed and they said, \"O Allah,
convey from us to our Prophet that we have met You and we are pleased
with You and You are pleased with us.\"\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1317\. Anas said, \"My uncle, Anas ibn an-Nadr, missed the fighting at
Badr and said, \'Messenger of Allah, I missed the first battle in which
you fought the idolaters. If Allah gives me the opportunity to fight the
idolaters, Allah will see what I shall do!\' On the Day of Uhud, the
Muslims were routed and he said, \'O Allah, I apologise to You for what
these people have done (i.e. his companions) and I declare myself
innocent to You of what those people have done, (i.e. the idolaters).\'
Then he went forward and Sa\'d ibn Mu\'adh met him. He said, \'O Sa\'d
ibn Mu\'adh! The Garden, by the Lord of the Ka\'ba! I smell its
fragrance from below Uhud!\' Sa\'d said, \'Messenger of Allah, I could
not do what he did.\'\" Anas said, \"We found him with about eighty
wounds, sword thrusts or spear stabs or arrows. We found that he had
been killed and the idolaters had mutilated him. No one could recognise
him except for his sister by his fingertips.\' Anas said, \"We used to
think or suppose that this ayat was sent down about him and his like,
*\'Among the believers there are men who have been true to the contract
they made with Allah.\'* (33:23)\" \[Agreed upon\]

1318\. It is related from Samura that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"In the night I dreamt that two
men came to me and took me up the tree and had me enter the most
beautiful and excellent house and I have never seen a better house than
it. They said, \'This house is the house of the martyrs.\'\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

1319\. Anas reported that Umm ar-Rubayyi\' bint al-Bara\', the mother of
al-Haritha ibn Suraqa, came to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, and said, \"O Messenger of Allah, will you not tell me
about Haritha?\" He had been killed at the Battle of Badr. \"If he is in
the Garden, I will be patient. If the case is other than that, I will
weep my eyes out for him.\" He said, \"Umm Haritha, there are many
gardens within the Garden, and your son has obtained the Highest
Paradise.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1320\. Jabir ibn \'Abdullah said, \"My father was brought to the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, and he had been
mutilated. He was placed before him and I went to uncover his face and
some people prevented me.\' The Prophet said, \'The angels are still
covering him with their wings.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1321\. Sahl ibn Hunayf reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"If anyone asks Allah Almighty for
martyrdom with sincerity, Allah will make him reach the degree of the
martyrs, even if he dies in bed.\" \[Muslim\]

1322\. Anas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who sincerely seeks martyrdom will
be given the reward of it, even if he is not wounded.\" \[Muslim\]

1323\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Martyrs only experience the blow which
kills them as one of you might experience the prick of a sting.\"
\[at-Tirmidhi\]

1324\. \'Abdullah ibn Abi Awfa reported that during one of the battles
in which the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, met the enemy, he waited until the sun declined and then stood up
to address the people and said, \"O people! Do not be too eager to meet
the enemy and ask Allah for well-being. When you do meet them, be
steadfast. Know that the Garden lies under the shadow of the swords.\"
Then he said, \"O Allah, Sender-down of the Book and Mover of the clouds
and Vanquisher of the Companies, defeat them and help us against them!\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1325\. Sahl ibn Sa\'d stated that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Two things will not be rejected -
or rarely rejected - the supplication at the time of the call to prayer
and in battle when people are pressing against one another.\" \[Abu
Dawud\]

1326\. Anas said, \"When the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, went on a raid, he would say, \'O Allah, You are my
Support and my Helper. I move by You and I attack by You, and I fight by
You.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1327\. Abu Musa reported that when the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, feared a people, he said, \"O Allah, we set You against
them and we seek refuge with You from their evils.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1328\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Good will remain tied to the forelocks
of horses until the Day of Rising.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1329\. \'Urwa al-Bariqi stated that the Prophet , may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Good will remain tied to the forelocks of
horses until the Day of Rising: the reward and booty.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1330\. Abu Hurayra reported said that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"If anyone keeps a horse in the
way of Allah out of belief in Allah and in confirmation of His promise,
its food, water, droppings and urine will be placed in his balance on
the Day of Rising.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1331\. Abu Mas\'ud said, \"A man came to the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, with a haltered camel and said, \'This is for
the way of Allah.\' The Messenger of Allah said, \'You will have seven
hundred camels on the Day of Rising, all haltered.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1332\. Abu Hammad, and he is called Abu Su\'ad or Abu Asad or Abu \'Amir
or Abu \'Amr or Abu\'l-Aswad or Abu \'Abs \'Uqba ibn \'Amir al-Juhani
said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, say while he was on the minbar, \'In (the ayat) \"Prepare
against them all the force you can,\" \"force\" means archery, \"force\"
means archery, \"force\" means archery.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1333\. \'Uqba ibn \'Amir al-Juhani said, \"I heard the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \'Many lands will
be opened up to you and Allah will be enough for you, so none of you
should fail to look after his arrows.\" \[Muslim\]

1334\. \'Uqba ibn \'Amir al-Juhani reported that the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who is taught
shooting and then abandons it is not one of us - or he has rebelled.\"
\[Muslim\]

1335\. \'Uqba ibn \'Amir al-Juhani said, \"I heard the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \"Allah will admit
three men into the Garden on account of one arrow: the one who made it,
making sure it was made well, the one who shot it and the one who handed
it over. So shoot and ride. I prefer your shooting to your riding.
Anyone who abandons shooting after having been taught it, out of
aversion to it, has abandoned a blessing. (or he said, \'been ungrateful
for.\')\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1336\. Salama ibn al-Akwa\' said, \"The Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, passed by a group who were shooting against one another
and said, \'Shoot, Banu Isma\'il! Your ancestor was an archer.\'\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

1337\. \'Amr ibn \'Abasa said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \'If anyone shoots an arrow in
the way of Allah, it is equivalent to freeing a slave.\'\" \[Abu Dawud
and at-Tirmidhi\]

1338\. Abu Yahya Khuraym ibn Fatik reported that the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"If anyone spends
anything in the way of Allah, it is written for him as seven hundred.\"
\[at-Tirmidhi\]

1339\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"No slave fasts one day in
the way of Allah without Allah putting his face seventy years\' journey
away from the Fire on account of that day.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1340\. Abu Umama reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"If anyone fasts a day in the way of Allah,
Allah will put a ditch between him and the Fire whose width is the same
as the space between heaven and earth.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1341\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who dies without going on an
expedition and without having thought of himself as going on an
expedition has died with a characteristic of hypocrisy.\" \[Muslim\]

1342\. Jabir said, \"We were with the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, on an expedition and he said, \'In Madina there are men
who have been with you whatever distance you have travelled and whatever
valley you crossed. Only illness prevented them from coming.\"

One variant, \"A valid excuse prevented them from coming.\"

One variant has, \"Without their sharing with you in the reward.\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

1343\. Abu Musa reported that a bedouin came to the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, and said, \"Messenger of Allah, one man
fights for booty, one man fights to be remembered and one man fights to
be shown his place.\"

In one variant, \"He fights for bravery and fights out of rage.\"

In one variant, \"One fights in anger. Which one is in the way of Allah?
The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said,
\'The one who fights so that the word of Allah be uppermost is in the
way of Allah.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1344\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr ibn al-\'As said, \"The Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \'There is no expedition,
or raid, on which a man goes and in which he takes booty and is safe
without sending ahead two-thirds of his reward. But on the raid or
expedition during which he does not take booty and is wounded, he will
have his full reward.\" \[Muslim\]

1345\. Abu Umama reported that a man said, \"Messenger of Allah, give me
permission to travel.\" The Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said, \"Travel of my community is jihad in the way of Allah, the
Mighty and Exalted.\"

1346\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr ibn al-\'As reported that the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Returning is the same as
setting out on the expedition.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1347\. As-Sa\'ib ibn Yazid said, \"When the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, returned from the expedition of Tabuk, the people
met him and I met him with the children at Thaniyyatu\'l-Wada\'.\" \[Abu
Dawud\]

In al-Bukhari, he said, \"We went with the children to
Thaniyyatu\'l-Wada\' to meet the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace.\"

1348\. Abu Umama reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"If someone does not raid nor equip a raider nor
look after the family of someone on an expedition, Allah will inflict a
calamity on him before the Day of Rising.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1349\. Anas reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said, \"Fight against the idolaters with your wealth, selves and
tongues.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1350\. Abu \'Amr, and it is said Abu Hakim, an-Nu\'man ibn Muqarrin
said, \"I was present with the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, when he did not fight at the beginning of the day,
but delayed fighting until the sun declined and the winds blew and help
descended.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1351\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Do not desire to meet the enemy. Ask
Allah for well-being. When you meet them, be steadfast.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1352\. Abu Hurayra and Jabir reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"War is deception.\" \[Agreed upon\]

**235. Chapter: On the clarification of those who are martyrs in respect
of the reward of the Next World, but who are washed and prayed over,
which is the not the case with those killed fighting the unbelievers**

1353\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"There are five categories of martyr:
someone killed by the plague, someone killed by an abdominal disease,
someone who drowns, someone who is killed by a collapsing building and
the martyr killed fighting in the way of Allah.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1354\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Whom do you consider to be the martyrs
among you.\" They said, \"Messenger of Allah, anyone who is killed in
the way of Allah is a martyr.\" He said, \"The martyrs among my people
will then be few.\" They said, \"Then who are they, Messenger of
Allah?\" He said, \"Anyone who is killed in the way of Allah is a
martyr. Anyone who dies in the way of Allah is a martyr. Anyone who dies
of the plague is a martyr. Anyone who dies of a stomach illness is a
martyr. Anyone who drowns is a martyr.\" \[Muslim\]

1355\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr ibn al-\'As said, \"The Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \'Anyone who is killed defending
his property is a martyr.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1356\. Abu\'l-A\'war Sa\'id ibn Zayd ibn \'Amr ibn Nufayl, one of the
ten who were promised the Garden, who said, \"I heard the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \'Anyone who is
killed defending his property is a martyr. Anyone who is killed
defending his life is a martyr. Anyone who is killed defending his deen
is a martyr. Anyone who is killed defending his family is a martyr.\"
\[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1357\. Abu Hurayra said, \"A man came to the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, and said, \'Messenger of Allah,
what is your opinion about a man who comes wanting to seize my
property?\' He said, \'Do not give him your property.\' He said, \'What
is your opinion if he fights me?\' He said, \'Then fight him.\' He said,
\'What is your opinion if he kills me?\' He said, \'Then you will be a
martyr.\' He said, \'What is your opinion if I kill him?\' He said,
\'Then he will be in the Fire.\'\" \[Muslim\]

**236. Chapter: On the excellence of freeing slaves**

> Allah says, *\"But he has not braved the steep ascent. What will
> convey to you what the steep ascent is? Freeing a slaveÉ\"* (90:11-13)

1358\. Abu Hurayra said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said to me, \'If anyone frees a Muslim slave, for
every limb of his, Allah will free one of his own limbs from the Fire
until he is set free by his setting free of the slave.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1359\. Abu Dharr said, \"I said, \'Messenger of Allah, what action is
the best?\' He said, \'Belief in Allah and jihad in His way.\' I said,
\'What is the best kind of setting free?\' He said, \'That of the person
most valued in the eyes of his people and the one with the highest
price.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

**237. Chapter: On the excellence of being good to slaves**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Worship Allah and do not associate anything
> with Him. Be good to your parents and relatives and to orphans and the
> very poor, and to neighbours who are related to you and neighbours who
> are not related to you, and to companions and travellers and your
> slaves.\"* (4:36)

1360\. Al-Ma\'rur ibn Suwayd said, \"I saw Abu Dharr when he was wearing
a cloak and his slave was wearing a similar cloak. I asked him about
that and he mentioned that in the time of the Messenger of Allah he had
once exchanged insults with a man and had abused him by insulting his
mother. The Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said,
\"You are a man who still has some of the *Jahiliyya* in you. They are
your brothers whom Allah has placed under your authority. Anyone who has
authority over his brother should feed him from what he eats and clothe
him from what he wears and should not oblige his brothers to do what is
too much for them. If you ask that of them, then give them a hand.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1361\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"When a servant of one of you brings him food,
if he does not sit with him, he should at least give him a morsel or
two - or a bite or two. He is the one who prepared it.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

**238. Chapter: On the excellence of a slave who fulfils the right he
owes Allah and the right of his masters**

1362\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"When a slave gives good advice to his
master and worships his Lord well, he has his reward twice over.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1363\. Abu Hurayra said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \'A virtuous owned slave has two rewards.\'
By the One who has the soul of Abu Hurayra in His hand, were it not for
jihad in the way of Allah, the hajj, and devotion to my mother, I would
like to die as a slave.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1364\. Abu Musa al-Ash\'ari reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"A slave who worships his
Lord well and gives his master the right which he owes him, and good
advice and obedience has two rewards.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1365\. Abu Musa reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Three people will have a double reward:
a man of the People of the Book who believes both in his Prophet and in
Muhammad, a slave who fulfils his duty to both Allah and his master, and
a man who has a slave-girl whom he teaches adab (i.e. good manners) so
that she has good adab and educated her in the best possible way and
then frees her and marries her. He has two rewards.\" \[Agreed upon\]

**239. Chapter: The excellence of worship in times of violent
turbulence, which is confusion, civil strife and the like**

1366\. Ma\'qil ibn Yasar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Worship in a time of violent
turbulence is like emigration to me.\" \[Muslim\]

**240. Chapter: On the excellence of being generous in buying and
selling, taking and giving, settling debts and accounts well, giving
slightly more in the measure and weighing, and the prohibition against
being stingy. The excellence of granting a delay to the wealthy and the
one in hardship, or cancelling the debt**

> Allah says, *\"Whatever good you do, Allah knows it,\"* (W2:213;
> H2:215) and the Almighty says, *\"\'My people! give full measure and
> full weight, with justice; do not diminish people\'s goods\"* (W11:84;
> H11:85) The Almighty says, *\"Woe to the stinters! Those who, when
> they take a measure from people, exact full measure, but when they
> give them a measure or weight, hand over less than is due. Do such
> people not realise that they will be raised up on a Terrible Day, the
> Day mankind will stand before the Lord of all the worlds?\"* (83:1-6)

1367\. Abu Hurayra reported that a man came to ask the Prophet to pay a
debt he owed him and spoke rudely to him. The Companions made for him
but the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
said, \"Let him be. Anyone with a right is allowed speak.\" Then he
said, \"Give him one the right age for the one he is owed.\" They said,
\"Messenger of Allah, we can only find an older, more valuable one.\" He
said, \"Give to him. The best of you is he who is most generous in
settlement.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1368\. Jabir reported the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"May Allah show mercy to a man who is generous
when he sells, when he buys and when he asks for settlement.\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

1369\. Abu Qatada said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \"Whoever wants Allah to save him
from the calamity of the Day of Rising should give more time to someone
in financial difficulties or absolve him.\" \[Muslim\]

1370\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"There was a man who used give people
credit. He used to say to his slave, \"When you come to someone in
difficulties, give him more time, perhaps Allah will excuse us.\' Then
he met Allah and He did excuse him.\"\[Agreed upon\]

1371\. Abu Mas\'ud al-Badri reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"A man among those before
you underwent the reckoning and no good at all was found for him except
that, being a wealthy man, he used to do business with people and used
to order his employees to make allowances for anyone in difficulties. So
Allah, the Mighty and Exalted, said, \'We have more right to do that
than you,\' and they pardoned him.\" \[Muslim\]

1372\. Hudhayfa said, \"One of the slaves of Allah Almighty to whom
Allah gave money will be brought before Him, and He will say to him,
\"What did you do in the world?\" He will say - and they cannot conceal
anything from Allah - \"O my Lord, You gave me wealth and I used to do
business with people. Part of my character was excusing others. I used
to be easy with those who were wealthy and give time to pay to those in
difficulties.\' Allah Almighty will say, \'I have more right to do that
than you. Pardon My slave.\'\" \'Uqba ibn \'Amr and Abu Mas\'ud
al-Ansari said: \"This is how we heard it from the mouth of the
Messenger of Allah.\" \[Muslim\]

1373\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who grants a respite to someone
in difficulty or absolves him, on the Day of Rising Allah will give him
shade under the shade of His throne on a day when there is no shade but
His shade.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1374\. Jabir reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, bought a camel from him for \[two *uqiyyas* and a dirham or
two dirhams\] and he weighed it out for him and then gave extra.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1375\. Abu Safwan Suwayd ibn Qays said, \"Makhrama al-\'Abdi and I
brought some clothes from Hajar and the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, came to us and bargained with us over some trousers. I
had a weigher who was paid to weigh. The Prophet\* said to the weigher,
\'Weigh and give more.\'\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

**[Book of Knowledge]{#ilm}**

**241. Chapter: the excellence of knowledge**

> Allah says*, \"Say: \'My Lord! increase me in knowledge,\"* (W20:111;
> H20:114) and He says, *\"Say: \'Are they the same -- those who know
> and those who do not know?\"* (W39:10; H39:9) The Almighty says,
> *\"Allah will raise in rank those of you who believe and those who
> have been given knowledge,\"* (58:11) and the Almighty says, *\"Only
> those of His slaves with knowledge have fear of Allah.\"* (35:28)

1376\. Mu\'awiya stated that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"When Allah desires good for someone, He
gives him correct understanding in the deen.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1377\. Ibn Mas\'ud reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"You can only have envy for two things:
for a man to whom Allah has given wealth which he spends in the way of
the truth, and for a man to whom Allah has given wisdom and he acts by
it and teaches it.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1378\. Abu Musa reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, said, \"The metaphor of the guidance and knowledge with which
Allah has sent me is the abundant rain which strikes the earth. Some of
it is fertile and accepts the water and brings forth plants and grass in
abundance. Some of it is hard and holds the water enabling Allah to let
people make use of it. They drink from it, water their animals and
irrigate. Some of the land it strikes is level and barren and does not
retain the water nor produce plants. The first is a metaphor for someone
who understands the deen of Allah and benefits from that with which
Allah has sent me and learns and teaches. The last is a metaphor for
someone who pays no attention to it for the sake of the Allah and does
not accept the guidance with which I have been sent.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1379\. Sahl ibn Sa\'d reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said to \'Ali, \"By Allah, for Allah to guide one man
by you is better for you than red camels.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1380\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr ibn al-\'As reported that the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Transmit from me, even if
it is only an ayat, and you may relate from the Children of Israel
without harm. Anyone who deliberately tells a lie regarding me will take
his seat in the Fire.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1381\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Allah will make the path to the Garden
easy for anyone who travels a path in search of knowledge.\" \[Muslim\]

1382\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who calls others to guidance
will have the same reward as those who follow him, without that
decreasing their reward in any way.\" \[Muslim\]

1383\. Abu Hurayra is that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"When the son of Adam dies, his actions are
cut off except for three - an on-going sadaqa and knowledge which
brought benefit and a virtuous son who makes supplication for him.\"
\[Muslim\]

1384\. Abu Hurayra said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \'This world is cursed, and
everything in it is cursed, except for the remembrance of Allah Almighty
and obedience to Him, and a scholar or a teacher.\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1385\. Anas stated that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who goes out in search of knowledge is
in the way of Allah until he returns.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1386\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"A believer will not have
his fill of good until he reaches the Garden.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1387\. Abu Umama reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Allah and His angels and the people of
the heavens and the earth, even the ants in their rocks and the fish,
pray for blessings on those who teach people good.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1388\. Abu\'d-Darda\' said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \'Allah will make the path to the
Garden easy for anyone who travels a path in search of knowledge. Angels
spread their wings for the seeker of knowledge out of pleasure for what
he is doing. Everyone in the heavens and everyone in the earth ask
forgiveness for a man of knowledge, even the fish in the water. The
superiority of the man of knowledge to the man of worship is like the
superiority of the moon to all the planets. The men of knowledge are the
heirs of the Prophets. The Prophets bequeath neither dinar nor dirham;
they bequeath knowledge. Whoever takes it has taken an ample
portion.\'\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1389\. Ibn Mas\'ud said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \'May Allah bless a man who hears
something from me and transmits it as he heard it. Many a person to whom
something is transmitted retains more than the person who first heard
it.\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1390\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who is asked for knowledge and
conceals it, will be bridled with a bridle of Fire on the day of
Rising.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1391\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who learns knowledge which
should be learned for the sake of Allah, the Mighty and Majestic, only
to obtain by it goods of this world, will not experience the scent of
the Garden on the Day of Rising.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1392\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr ibn al-\'As said, \"I heard the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \'Allah will not
take away knowledge from His servants, but knowledge will be taken away
as the men of knowledge are taken away until there is not a single man
of knowledge left. Then people will take ignorant men for their leaders
who will be asked something and give a fatwa (decision) without any
knowledge. They will go astray and lead others astray.\'\" \[Agreed
upon\]

**[Book of Praise of Allah and Thankfulness to Him]{#shukr}**

**242. Chapter: On the excellence of praise and thankfulness**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Remember Me -- I will remember you. Give
> thanks to Me and do not be ungrateful,\"* (W2:151; H2:152) and the
> Almighty says, *\"If you are grateful, I will certainty give you
> increase.\"* (W14:9; H14:7) The Almighty says, *\"Say: \'Praise be to
> Allah,\'\"* (W17:110; H17:111) and the Almighty says, *\"The end of
> their call is: \'Praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds.\'\"*
> (10:10)

1393\. Abu Hurayra reported that on the Night Journey, the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, was brought two glasses, one of
wine and one of milk. He looked at them and took the milk. Jibril said,
\'Praise be to Allah, the One who has guided you to the natural way. If
you had taken the wine, your community would have erred.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1394\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Every matter of importance which is not
begun with, \'Praise be to Allah\' is defective.\" \[Abu Dawud and
others\]

1395\. Abu Musa al-Ash\'ari reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"When the son of a slave of
Allah dies, Allah Almighty says to His angels, \'Have you taken My
slave\'s son?\' They say, \'Yes.\' He says, \'Did you take the darling
of his heart?\' They say, \'Yes.\' He says, \'What did My slave say?\'
They will say, \'He praised You and said \"To Allah we return.\"\' Allah
Almighty says, \'Build a house for My slave in the Garden and call it
the House of Praise.\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1396\. Anas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Allah is pleased with a slave of His who
eats something and praises Him for it and drinks something and praises
Him for it.\" \[Muslim\]

**[Book on the Prayer on the Messenger of Allah]{#prayer}**

**243. Chapter: On the prayer on the Messenger of Allah**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Allah and His angels call down blessings on
> the Prophet. O you who believe! call down blessings on him and ask for
> complete peace and safety for him.*\" (33:56)

1397\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr ibn al-\'As reported the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, says, \"Anyone who says a
prayer on me, Allah will pray on him ten times on account of it.\"
\[Muslim\]

1398\. Ibn Mas\'ud stated that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The nearest of people to me on the Day
of Rising will be the one who blesses me the most.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1399\. Aws ibn Aws reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The best of your days is the Day of
Jumu\'a, so do a lot of prayers on me during it. Your prayer is shown to
me.\" They said, \"Messenger of Allah, how will our prayer be shown to
you when you have become dust?\" He said, \"Allah has forbidden the
earth (to consume) the bodies of the Prophets.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1400\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"May humiliation be the lot any man who,
when I am mentioned in his presence, does not pray for blessing on me.\"
\[at-Tirmidhi\]

1401\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Do not make my grave a place of
celebration. Pray over me. Your prayer reaches me wherever you are.\"
\[Abu Dawud\]

1402\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"No one greets me without Allah
returning my spirit to me so that I can return the greeting to him.\"
\[Abu Dawud\]

1403\. \'Ali reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"A miser is someone who, when I am mentioned
in his presence, does not pray for blessing on me.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1404\. Fadala ibn \'Ubayd said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, heard a man making supplication in his
prayer without glorifying Allah Almighty or praying for blessing on the
Prophet. The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said, \'This one was in a hurry.\' Then he called him and said to
him - or to someone else - \"When one of you prays, he should begin by
glorifying his Lord, glory be to Him! and praising Him, and then pray
for blessing on the Prophet. Then he should ask for anything else he
wants afterwards.\'\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1405\. Abu Muhammad Ka\'b ibn \'Ujra said, \"The Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, came out to us and we said, \'Messenger
of Allah, we know how to greet you, but how should we bless you?\' He
said, \'Say, \"O Allah, bless Muhammad and the family of Muhammad as You
blessed the family of Ibrahim. You are Praiseworthy, Glorious. O Allah,
grant blessing to Muhammad and the family of Muhammad as You granted
blessing to the family of Ibrahim. You are Praiseworthy, Glorious.\"\'\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1406\. Abu Mas\'ud al-Badri said, \"Once the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, came to us while we were in the
assembly of Sa\'d ibn \'Ubada. Bashir ibn Sa\'d said to him, \'Allah
Almighty has commanded us to bless you, Messenger of Allah. How shall we
bless you?\' The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, was silent until we wished that he had not asked him. Then the
Messenger of Allah said, \'Say, \'O Allah, bless Muhammad and the family
of Muhammad as You blessed the family of Ibrahim. Grant blessing to
Muhammad and the family of Muhammad as You granted blessing to the
family of Ibrahim. You are the Praiseworthy, the Glorious,\' and the
greeting is the way you have been taught.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1407\. Abu Humayd as-Sa\'idi said, \"They said, \'O Messenger of Allah,
how should we bless you?\' He said, \'Say, \"O Allah, bless Muhammad and
his wives and descendants as You blessed Ibrahim. Grant blessing to
Muhammad and his wives and descendants as You granted blessing to
Ibrahim. You are Praiseworthy, Glorious.\"\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

**[Book of Dhikr]{#dhikr}**

**244. Chapter: On the excellence of dhikr and encouraging it**

> Allah says*, \"And remembrance of Allah is greater still\"* (29:45)
> and the Almighty says, *\"Remember Me -- I will remember you. Give
> thanks to Me and do not be ungrateful,\"* (W2:151; H2:152) and the
> Almighty says, *\"Remember your Lord in yourself humbly and fearfully,
> without loudness of voice, morning and evening. Do not be among the
> heedless.\"* (7:205) The Almighty says*, \"Remember Allah much so that
> hopefully you will be successful,\"* (62:10) and He says, *\"Muslim
> men and women - (to) men and women who remember Allah much: Allah has
> prepared forgiveness for them and an immense reward.\"* (33:35) Allah
> says*, \"O you who believe! Remember Allah, much, and glorify Him in
> the morning and the evening.\"* (33:41-42)

1408\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Two words are light on the tongue,
heavy in the balance, beloved to the Merciful: \'Glory be to Allah and
by His praise. Glory be to Allah, the Immense.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1409\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"I prefer saying, \'Glory be to Allah
and praise belongs to Allah. There is no god but Allah. Allah is
greater\' to everything the sun rises on.\" \[Muslim\]

1410\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who says, \'There is no god but
Allah alone with no partner. His is the kingdom and His is the praise,
and He has power over everything\' a hundred times a day, has the same
reward as if he had freed ten slaves, and a hundred good deeds are
written for him and a hundred bad deeds are effaced from him and he has
protection from Shaytan on that day until evening. No one will do
anything better than he does except a man who does it more than he
did.\" He said, \"Anyone who says, \'Glory be to Allah and by His
praise\' a hundred times a day will have his sins fall away, even if
they are like the froth of the sea.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1411\. Abu Ayyub al-Ansari reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who says, \'There is no god but
Allah alone with no partner. His is the kingdom and His is the praise.
He has power over everything\' ten times, it is as if he had set free
four slaves of the descendants of Isma\'il. \[Agreed upon\]

1412\. Abu Dharr said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \'Shall I not tell you the words most beloved to
Allah? The words most beloved to Allah are \'Glory be to Allah and by
His praise.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1413\. Abu Malik al-Ash\'ari said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \'Purity is half of belief and
\"Praise be to Allah\" fills up the balance. \"Glory be to Allah and
praise belongs to Allah\" fills up the space between the heavens and the
earth.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1414\. Sa\'d ibn Abi Waqqas said, \"A desert Arab came to the Messenger
of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, and said, \'Teach me
some words which I can say.\' He said, \'Say: \"There is no god but
Allah alone without partner. Allah is indeed most great, and praise be
to Allah abundantly. Glory be to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds. There is
no power nor strength except by Allah, the Mighty, the Wise.\'\"\' He
said, \'Those are for my Lord. What about me?\' He said, \"Say: O Allah,
forgive me and show mercy to Me and guide me and provide for me.\'\"
\[Muslim\]

1415\. Thawban said, \"When the Messenger of Allah , may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, used to finish his prayer, he asked forgiveness
three times and said, \'O Allah, You are Peace and peace is from You.
You are blessed, O Possessor of majesty and nobility.\'\" Al-Awza\'i,
one of the transmitters of the hadith, was asked, \"How was the asking
forgiveness?\" He said, \"You say, \'I ask Allah\'s forgiveness. I ask
Allah\'s forgiveness.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1416\. Al-Mughira ibn Shu\'ba reported that when the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, finished the prayer and said
the *salam*, he would say, \"There is no god but Allah alone with no
partner. The kingdom and praise belong to Him and He has power over
everything. O Allah, none can withhold what You give nor give what You
withhold and the fortune of anyone who has one is of no avail against
You.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1417\. \'Abdullah ibn az-Zubayr reported that he used to say after every
prayer when he said the *salam*, \"There is no god but Allah alone with
no partner. The kingdom and praise belong to Him and He has power over
everything. There is no power nor strength except by Allah. There is no
god but Allah. We worship Him alone. He has blessing and He has
excellence and he has excellent praise. There is no god but Allah,
making the deen sincerely His, even if the unbelievers dislike it.\" Ibn
az-Zubayr said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, used to say \'There is no god but Allah\' with them after
every obligatory prayer.\" \[Muslim\]

1418\. Abu Hurayra reported that the poor of the Muhajirun came to the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, and said,
\"The wealthy have appropriated the high degrees and abiding bliss.\" He
said, \"How is that?\" He said, \"They pray as we pray and they fast as
we fast, but they give *sadaqa* and we do not give *sadaqa* and they set
free slaves and we do not set free slaves.\" The Messenger of Allah
said, \"Shall I inform you of something by which you will overtake those
who have preceded you and precede those who come after you and no one
will be better than you unless he does the same as you do?\" They said,
\"By all means, Messenger of Allah.\" He said, \"You should say \'Glory
be to Allah,\' \'Praise be to Allah,\' and \'Allah is greater\'
thirty-three times after every prayer.\" The poor Muhajirun then
returned to the Messenger of Allah and said, \"Our brothers who possess
property heard about what we were doing and they have done the same.\"
The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said,
\"That is a favour which Allah gives to anyone He wills.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1419\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who says after every prayer,
\'Glory be to Allah\' thirty-three times, \'Praise belongs to Allah\'
thirty-three times and \'Allah is greater\' thirty-three times and says
to complete the hundred, \'There is no god but Allah alone with no
partner. He has the kingdom and He has the praise and He has power over
everything,\' will be forgiven his sins, even if they are like the foam
of the sea.\" \[Muslim\]

1420\. Ka\'b ibn \'Ujra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Those who say -- or do -- the
following glorification after every obligatory prayer will not be
disappointed -- thirty-three times \'Glory be to Allah\', thirty-three
times \'Praise belongs to Allah,\' and thirty-three times \'Allah is
greater.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1421\. Sa\'d ibn Abi Waqqas is that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, used to seek refuge after the prayers
with these words: \'O Allah, I seek refuge with You from cowardice and
miserliness, and I seek refuge with You from being returned to the
weakest state of life \[i.e. senility\]. I seek refuge with You from the
temptation of this world and I seek refuge with You from the trial of
the grave.\'\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1422\. Mu\'adh reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, took him by the hand and said, \"Mu\'adh, by Allah,
I love you.\" He said, \"Mu\'adh, I advise you not to fail to say after
every prayer, \'O Allah, help me to remember You and thank You and
worship You well.\'\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1423\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"When one of you says the tashahhud , he
should seek refuge with Allah from four things. He should say, \'O
Allah. I seek refuge with You from the punishment of Hellfire, from the
punishment of the grave, from the trials of life and death and from the
evil of the trial of the Dajjal.\" \[Muslim\]

1424\. \'Ali said, \"When the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, did the prayer, the last thing he said between the
*tashahhud* and the *salam* was, \'O Allah, forgive me my past and
future wrong actions, what I conceal and what I make public and what I
have been extravagant in. You are the One who advances and the One who
defers. There is no god but You.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1425\. \'A\'isha said, \"In his ruku\' and sajda the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, used to say often, \'Glory be to You, O
Allah, our Lord, and with Your praise. O Allah, forgive me!\'\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1426\. \'A\'isha stated that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, used to say in his bowing and prostration,
\"Glorious, Holy, Lord of the angels and the Spirit.\" \[Muslim\]

1427\. Ibn \'Abbas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"As for *ruku\'*, exalt the Lord, the
Mighty and Exalted, in it, and as for prostration, exert yourself in
supplication, and it is proper that you be answered in it.\" \[Muslim\]

1428\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The closest that a slave of Allah comes
to his Lord is while he is prostrating, so make a lot of supplication
then.\" \[Muslim\]

1429\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, used to say in his prostration, \"O Allah,
forgive me all my sins, great and small, first and last, open and
secret.\" \[Muslim\]

1430\. \'A\'isha said, \"One night I missed the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, and felt for him. He was bowing - or
prostrating - and said, \'Glory be to You and by Your praise. There is
no god but You.\'

In one variant, \"I put my hand on the inside of his feet and he was in
the mosque. They were upright and he was saying, \'O Allah, I seek
refuge in Your pleasure from Your anger, and Your pardon from Your
punishment. I seek refuge in You from You. I cannot reckon Your praise.
You are as You praised Yourself.\'\"\" \[Muslim\]

1431\. Sa\'d ibn Abi Waqqas said, \"We were with the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, and he said, \'Are any of you
able to earn a thousand good deeds every day?\' One of those who was
sitting there asked him, \'How can someone earn a thousand good deeds?\'
He said, \'Glorifying a hundred times is written as a thousand good
deeds or a thousand errors fall away from him.\'\"\" \[Muslim\]

1432\. Abu Dharr reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"\"*Sadaqa* is owed by every joint you
have. Every glorification is *sadaqa*. Every praise is *sadaqa*. Every
*\'la ilaha illa\'llah\'* is *sadaqa*. Every *takbir* is *sadaqa*.
Commanding the right is *sadaqa*. Forbidding the wrong is *sadaqa*.
Praying two *rak\'ats* in the forenoon (*Duha*) covers all these.\"\"
\[Muslim\]

1433\. Umm al-Mu\'minin Juwayriyya bint al-Harith reported that the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, left her one morning
to pray *Subh* while she was in her place of prayer. Then he returned
after the sun was well risen and she was still sitting there. He said,
\"You are still in the state you were when I left you?\" She said,
\"Yes.\" The Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"I
recited four words three times. If they were to be weighed against
everything you have recited today they would outweigh it: \'Glory be to
Allah and by His praise in number as great as His creation and His own
pleasure, the weight of His Throne and the ink of His words.\'\"\"
\[Muslim\]

In one of the variants of Muslim, \"Glory be to Allah in number as great
as His creation. Glory be to Allah according to His own pleasure. Glory
be to Allah by the weight of His Throne. Glory be to Allah according to
the ink of His words.\"

In the variant of at-Tirmidhi, \"Shall I teach you some words you can
say? \'Glory be to Allah in number as great as His creation. Glory be to
Allah in number as great as His creation. Glory be to Allah in number as
great as His creation. Glory be to Allah according to His own pleasure.
Glory be to Allah according to His own pleasure. Glory be to Allah
according to His own pleasure. Glory be to Allah by the weight of His
Throne. Glory be to Allah by the weight of His Throne. Glory be to Allah
by the weight of His Throne. Glory be to Allah according to the ink of
His words. Glory be to Allah according to the ink of His words. Glory be
to Allah according to the ink of His words.\'\"

1434\. Abu Musa al-Ash\'ari reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The metaphor of someone who remembers
his Lord and someone who does not remember Him is that of the living and
the dead.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

Muslim related it and said, \"The metaphor of a house in which Allah is
mentioned and a house in which Allah is not mentioned is that of the
living and the dead.\"

1435\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Allah Almighty says, \'I am in My
slave\'s opinion of Me and I am with Him when He remembers Me. When he
remembers Me in himself, I mention him in Myself. If he mentions Me in
an assembly, I mention him in a better assembly than them.\'\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1436\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The \'*mufarridun*\' have
outstripped.\" They said, \"Who are the \'*mufarridun*\', Messenger of
Allah?\" He said, \"The men and women who remember Allah
often.\"\[Muslim\]

1437\. Jabir said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, say, \'The best dhikr is \'There is no god but
Allah.\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1438\. \'Abdullah ibn Busr reported that a man said, \"Messenger of
Allah, the laws of Islam are too much for me. Tell me something I can
cling to.\" He said, \"Your tongue should remain moist with the
remembrance of Allah.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1439\. Jabir stated that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said, \"Anyone who says, \'Glory be to Allah and by His praise,\'
has a palm-tree planted for him in the Garden.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1440\. Ibn Mas\'ud reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"I met Ibrahim on my Night Journey. He
said, \'O Muhammad, convey the greeting from me to your community and
tell them that the Garden has good soil and sweet water. It is vast and
its plants say, \"Glory be to Allah. Praise be to Allah. There is no god
but Allah. Allah is greater.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1441\. Abu\'d-Darda\' reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Shall I inform you of the best of
your actions and the purest of your property and the highest of your
degrees and what is better for you than spending gold and silver and
better for you than encountering the enemy and striking their necks and
their striking your necks?\" They said, \"Yes, indeed!\" He said,
\"Remembrance of Allah Almighty.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1442\. Sa\'d ibn Abi Waqqas reported that, together with the Messenger
of Allah, he visited a woman and in front of her were some date-stones -
or pebbles - which she was using to glorify Allah. He said, \'Shall I
inform you what is easier for you than this - or better?\' He said,
\'Glory be to Allah by the number of things He has created in the heaven
and glory be to Allah by the number of things He has created in the
earth and glory be to Allah by the number of things in between them and
glory be to Allah by the number of things He has created. Then say,
\"Allah is greater\" in the same way and \"Praise be to Allah\" in the
same way, and \"There is no god but Allah\" in the same way and \"There
is no power nor strength except by Allah\" in the same way.\'\"
\[at-Tirmidhi\]

1443\. Abu Musa said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \'Shall I direct you to one of the treasures of
the Garden? I said, \'Yes, Messenger of Allah.\' He said, \'There is no
power nor strength except by Allah.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

**245. Chapter: On remembering Allah Almighty standing, sitting and
lying down, and while in a state of major impurity, minor impurity and
while menstruating - except for the Qur\'an which is not lawful for
someone in a state of major impurity or menstruating**

> Allah says, *\"In the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the
> alternation of night and day, there are Signs for people of
> intelligence: those who remember Allah standing, sitting and lying on
> their sides.\"* (3:190-191)

1444\. \'A\'isha said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to remember Allah Almighty in all states.\"
\[Muslim\]

1445\. Ibn \'Abbas reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"If one of you comes to his wife and says, \'In
the name of Allah. O Allah, protect us from Shaytan and protect any
child You grant us from Shaytan,\' and a child is decreed for them,
Shaytan will not harm it.\" \[Agreed upon\]

**246. Chapter: What one says when going to sleep and waking up**

1446\. Hudhayfa and Abu Dharr reported that when the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, retired to his bed, he said,
\"In Your name, O Allah, I live and I die.\" When he woke up he said,
\"Praise be to Allah who gave me life and He made me die and to Him is
the gathering.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

**247. Chapter: on the excellence of circles of dhikr, and the
recommendation to join them and the prohibition against parting from
them without excuse**

> Allah says*, \"Restrain yourself patiently with those who call on
> their Lord morning and evening, desiring His Face. Do not turn your
> eyes from them.\"* (18:28)

1447\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Allah Almighty has angels who travel
the highways and by-ways seeking out the people of dhikr. When they find
people remembering Allah, the Mighty and Majestic, they call out to one
another, \'Come to what you hunger for!\' and they enfold them with
their wings stretching up to the lowest heaven. Their Lord - who knows
best - asks them, \'What are My slaves saying?\' They say, \'They are
glorifying You, proclaiming Your greatness, praising You and magnifying
You.\' He says, \'Have they seen Me?\' They say, \'No, by Allah, they
have not seen You.\' He says, \'How would it be if they were to see
Me?\' \[extra \'He said\'s deleted\] They say, \'If they were to see
You, they would worship You even more intensely and magnify You even
more intensely and glorify You even more intensely.\' He says, \'What
are they asking for?\' They say, \'They are asking You for the Garden.\'
He says, \'Have they seen it?\' They say, \'No, by Allah, O Lord, they
have not seen it.\'\" He says, \'How would it be if they were to see
it?\' They say, \'If they were to see it, they would yearn for it even
more strongly and seek it even more assiduously and would have an even
greater desire for it.\' He says, \'What are they seeking refuge from?\'
\'They are seeking refuge from the Fire.\' He says, \'Have they seen
it?\' He says, \'How would it be if they were to see it?\' They say,
\'If they were to see it, they would flee from it even harder and have
an even greater fear of it.\' He says, \'I testify to you that I have
forgiven them.\' One of angels says, \'Among them is so-and-so who is
not one of them. He came to get something he needed.\' He says, \'They
are sitting and the one sitting with them will not be disappointed.\'\"
\[Agreed upon\]

In the variant of Muslim from Abu Hurayra is that the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Allah also has angels who travel
about seeking out gatherings of dhikr. When they find a gathering in
which there is dhikr, they sit with them and cover one another with
their wings until they fill up the space between them and the lowest
heaven. When they separate, they rise and ascend to the heaven. Allah,
the Mighty and Majestic - and He knows best - asks them, \'Where did you
come from?\' They say, \'We came from some of Your slaves in the earth
who were glorifying You, proclaiming Your greatness, saying, \'There is
no god but Allah,\' praising You and supplicating You.\' He said, \'What
are they asking Me for?\' They say, \'They are asking You for Your
Garden.\' He said, \'Have they seen My Garden?\' They say, \'No, O
Lord.\' He says, \'How would it be if they were to see My Garden?\' They
say, \'They are seeking Your protection.\' They say, \'From Your Fire, O
Lord.\' He says, \'Have they seen My Fire?\' They say, \'No.\' He says,
\'How would it be if they were to see My Fire?\' They say, \'And they
are asking Your forgiveness.\' He says, \'I have forgiven them and given
them what they ask and I have granted them protection from what they
seek protection from.\' They say, \'O Lord, a certain slave is among
them who just happened to be passing and sat down with them.\' He says,
\'I have forgiven him. They are such people that the one who sits with
them will not be disappointed.\'\"

1448\. Abu Hurayra and Abu Sa\'id reported that the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"No people sit
remembering Allah, the Mighty and Exalted, without the angels
surrounding them and mercy covering them and tranquillity descending on
them and Allah mentioning them to those who are with Him.\" \[Muslim\]

1449\. Abu Waqid al-Harith ibn \'Awf reported that once when the
Messenger of Allah may Allah bless him and grant him peace, was sitting
in the mosque with some people, three people arrived. Two of them came
up to the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
and the other left. The two stood before the Messenger of Allah. One of
them saw a place in the gathering and sat in it. Another sat behind the
assembly. The third turned around and left. When the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, finished, he said, \"Shall I
tell you about those three people? One of them betook himself to Allah
and so Allah took him in His mercy. The second was shy about causing
overcrowding and so Allah was shy with him \[so He would not punish
him\]. The other turned away, so Allah turned away \[His mercy\] from
him.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1450\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri said, \"Mu\'awiya went out to a circle in
the mosque and said, \'What is it that has caused you to sit here?\'
They said, \'We have sat down to remember Allah.\' He said, \'By Allah,
is that the only thing that has made you sit together?\' They said, \'We
have sat down for that reason alone.\' He said, \'I did not make you
swear out of any suspicion of you. No one who had a similar position to
mine in respect of the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, has related less hadith than I have. The Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, went out to a circle of his
Companions and said, \"What is it that has caused you to sit together?\"
They said, \"We have sat down to remember Allah and praise Him for He
has guided us to Islam and been gracious to us.\" He said, \"By Allah,
is that the only thing that has made you sit together?\" They said, \"By
Allah, we have sat for that reason alone.\" He said, \"I did not make
you swear out of any suspicion of you, but Jibril came to me and
reported to me that the angels are boasting about you.\"\'\" \[Muslim\]

**248. Chapter: On dhikr morning and evening**

> Allah says, *\"Remember your Lord in yourself humbly and fearfully,
> without loudness of voice, morning and evening (âsâl). Do not be among
> the heedless,\"* (7:205) and linguists say that *âsâl* is the plural
> of *asîl* and is the time between *\'Asr* and *Maghrib*. Allah says,
> *\"Glorify your Lord before the rising of the sun and before its
> setting,\"* (W20:128; H20:130) and He says, *\"Glorify your Lord with
> praise in the evening (\'ashi) and the early morning.\"* (40:55) and
> linguists says that *\'ashi i*s between the decline of the sun and its
> setting. The Almighty says, *\"In houses which Allah has permitted to
> be built and in which His name is remembered, there are men who
> proclaim His glory morning,\"* (W24:26; H24:36-37) and the Almighty
> says, *\"We subjected the mountains to glorify with him in the evening
> and at sunrise.\"* (W38:17; H38:18)

1451\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"On the Day of Rising no one will bring
anything better than someone who says in the morning and evening,
\'Glory be to Allah and by His praise\' a hundred times except someone
who says the same as he says or more.\" \[Muslim\]

1452\. Abu Hurayra said, \"A man came to the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, and said, \'Messenger of Allah,
what agony I suffered last night from a scorpion which stung me
yesterday!\' He said, \'If you had said in the evening, \"I seek refuge
with the perfect words of Allah from the evil of what He has created,\"
it would not have harmed you.\" \[Muslim\]

1453\. Abu Hurayra stated that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to say in the morning, \"O Allah, by You we start
the day and by You we end it, by You we live and by You we die and to
You is the gathering.\" In the evening he would say. \"O Allah, by You
we end the day, by You we live and by You we die and to You is the
gathering.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1454\. Abu Hurayra reported that Abu Bakr as-Siddiq said, \"Messenger of
Allah, tell me some words I can say in the morning and in the evening.\"
He said, \"Say, \'O Allah, Creator of the heavens and the earth, Knower
of the Unseen and the Visible, Lord and Master of everything. I bear
witness that there is no god but You. I seek refuge from you from the
evil of my self and from the evil of Shaytan and his shirk.\'\" He said,
\"Say it in the morning and in the evening and when you go to bed.\"
\[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1455\. Ibn Mas\'ud said, \"In the evening, the Prophet of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \'We have reached the evening
and the kingdom has reached the evening by Allah. Praise belongs to
Allah. There is no god but Allah alone with no partner,\" The
transmitter said, \"I think that he also said, \'His is the kingdom and
His is the praise. He has power over everything. Lord, I ask you for the
good of what is in this night and the good of what comes after it, and I
seek refuge with You from the evil of what is in this night and the evil
of what comes after it. Lord, I seek refuge with You from laziness and
the evil of pride. Lord, I seek refuge with You from punishment in the
Fire and punishment in the grave.\'\" In the morning, he also said, \"We
have reached the morning and the kingdom has reached the morning by
Allah.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1456\. \'Abdullah ibn Khubayb said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said to me, \'Recite, \"Say: He is God,
One,\" and the suras of seeking refuge in the evening and the morning
three times, it will be enough to protect you in respect of
everything.\'\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1457\. \'Uthman ibn \'Affan reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"No slave of Allah says in
the morning every day and the evening every night, \'In the name of
Allah by whose name nothing in the earth or the heaven can be harmed. He
is the Hearing, the Knowing,\' three times without that ensuring that
nothing will harm him.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

**249. Chapter: On what to say when going to sleep**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"In the creation of the heavens and the earth,
> and the alternation of night and day, there are signs for people of
> intelligence: those who remember Allah, standing, sitting, and lying
> on their sides, and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the
> earth.\"* (3:190-191)

1458\. Hudhayfa and Abu Dharr reported that when the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, went to bed, he said, \"In Your
name, O Allah, I live and die.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1459\. \'Ali stated that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said to him and Fatima, \"When you retire to your
bed, - or when you take yourselves to bed - say \'Allah is greater\'
thirty-three times, glorify Allah thirty-three times, praise Him
thirty-three times.\" One variant has, \"Glorify Allah thirty-four
times,\" and one variant, \"Say \'Allah is greater\' thirty-four
times.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1460\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"When one of you retires to bed, he
should wipe over his bed with the inside of his wrapper. He does not
know what might have been on it after him. Then he should say, \'By Your
name, my Lord, I have lain on my side and I have raised it up by You. If
You keep my soul, show mercy to it. If You release it, then protect it
in the way You protect Your virtuous slaves.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1461\. \'A\'isha reported that when the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, went to bed, he would spit into his hands
and recite the two suras of refuge and wipe his body with them.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

In one of their variants, \"When the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, retired to bed every night he would put his palms
together and then spit into them and recite into them, \'Say: He is
Allah, One,\' \'Say: I seek refuge with the Lord of daybreak,\' and
\'Say: I seek refuge with the Lord of people,\' and then wipe as much of
his body as he could with them. He would begin with his head and face
and then the rest of his body. He would do that three times.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1462\. Al-Bara\' ibn \'Azib said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said to me, \'When you go to your bed, do
wudu\' as you do for the prayer and then lie down on your right side and
said, \'O Allah, I have surrendered my soul to You and I have entrusted
my affair to You and I have sought refuge in You out of desire for You
and fear of You. There is no shelter nor place of safety from You except
with You. I have believed in Your Book which You sent down and Your
Prophet whom You sent.\' Then if you die, you will die in the natural
harmonious form of man. Make them the last thing that you say.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1463\. Anas reported that when the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, retired to his bed, he said, \"Praise be to Allah who
has fed us and given us to drink and given us enough and given us a
refuge. How many people there are who have no one to give them enough
nor any refuge!\" \[Muslim\]

1464\. Hudhayfa reported that when the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, wanted to lie down, he would place his
right hand under his cheek and then say, \'O Allah, protect me from Your
punishment on the Day when You raise up Your slaves.\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

Abu Dawud related it from Hafsa.

**[Book of Supplications]{#du'a}**

**250. Chapter: On the excellence of supplication**

> Allah says, *\"And your Lord says, \'Call on Me: and I will answer
> you,\'\"* (40:60) and He says, *\"Call on your Lord humbly and
> secretly. He does not love those who overstep the limits.\"* (W7:54;
> H7:55) He says, *\"If My slaves ask you about Me, I am near. I answer
> the call of the caller when he calls on Me,\"* (W2:185; H2:186) and
> the Almighty says, *\"He Who responds to the oppressed when they call
> on Him and removes their distress.\"* (W2:64; H27:62)

1465\. An-Nu\'man ibn Bashir reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Supplication is worship itself.\" \[Abu
Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1466\. \'A\'isha reported said that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, used to prefer comprehensive
supplications and abandoned other kinds.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1467\. Anas said, \"A frequent supplication of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, was, \'O Allah! Give us good in this
world and good in the Hereafter and safeguard us from the punishment of
the Fire.\' (W2:199: H2:201)\" \[Agreed upon\]

1468\. Ibn Mas\'ud reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to say, \"O Allah, I ask You for guidance, fearful
awareness, chastity and self-sufficiency.\" \[Muslim\]

1469\. Tariq ibn Ashyam said, \"When a man became Muslim, the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, taught him the prayer and then
commanded him to make supplication with these words, \'O Allah, forgive
me and show mercy to me. Guide me, give me well being and provide for
me.\'\" \[Muslim\]

In a variant of his from Tariq is that he heard the Prophet when a man
came to him and said, \"Messenger of Allah, what do I say when I ask of
my Lord?\" He said, \"Say, \'O Allah, forgive me and show mercy to me.
Give me well being and provide for me.\' These words are sufficient for
you for this world and the Next.\"

1470\. \'Abdullah ibn Amr ibn al-\'As reported that the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"O Allah who
turns the hearts, turn our hearts to obedience to You.\" \[Muslim\]

1471\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Seek refuge with Allah from severe trials,
lasting distress, an evil destiny and the curses of enemies.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

In a variant, \"Sufyan said, \'I am not sure whether I myself added one
of them.\'\"

1472\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, used to say, \'O Allah, put right for me my
deen in which lies the protection of my affair and put right for me this
world in which lies my livelihood and put right for me the Next World in
which is my future. Make life increase in every good thing for me and
make death a rest for me from every evil thing.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1473\. \'Ali said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said to me, \'Say: \'O Allah, guide me and put me
right.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1474\. Anas said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, used to say, \'O Allah, I seek refuge with You from
incapacity, laziness, cowardice, senility and miserliness. I seek refuge
with You from the punishment of the grave and I seek refuge with You
from the trials of life and death.\'\" \[Muslim\]

One variant has, \"From heavy debts and the oppression of men.\".

1475\. Abu Bakr as-Siddiq reported that he said to the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, \"Teach me a
supplication which I can make in my prayer.\" He said, \"Say: \'O Allah,
I have wronged myself a great deal and none forgives wrong actions
except You, so grant me Your forgiveness and be merciful to me. You are
the Ever-Forgiving, the All-Merciful.\" \[Agreed upon\]

In one variant, \"And in my house.\" It is related as \"much wronged\"
and \"greatly wronged.\" They should be joined: much and greatly.

1476\. Abu Musa reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, used to supplicate Allah using this supplication, \"O Allah,
forgive me my error and my ignorance and my extravagance in my affair
and what You know of me. O Allah, forgive me my seriousness, my jest, my
inadvertence and my deliberateness. All of that is with You. O Allah,
forgive me my past and future wrong actions, what I conceal and what I
make public and what You know of me. You are the One who advances and
defers. You have power over everything.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1477\. \'A\'isha said, \"One of the supplications of the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, was, \'O Allah, I seek
refuge with you from the evil of what I have done and the evil of what I
have left undone.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1478\. Ibn \'Umar reported that one of the supplications of the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, was, \"O
Allah, I seek refuge with you from Your blessing to me vanishing and
Your gift of well-being being altered and the sudden arrival of Your
revenge and all Your anger.\" \[Muslim\]

1479\. Zayd ibn Arqam said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, used to say, \'O Allah, I seek refuge with You
from incapacity, laziness, miserliness, senility and the punishment of
the grave. O Allah, give my soul Godfearing and purify it. You are the
best of those who purify. You are its Master and Guardian. O Allah, I
seek refuge with You from knowledge which does not bring benefit and
from a heart which is not fearful and from a self which is not content
and from a supplication which is not answered.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1480\. Ibn \'Abbas stated that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, used to say, \"O Allah, I have submitted myself
to You and I have believed in You. In You I have put my trust and to You
I turn. I argue by You and take You as arbitrator. Forgive me my past
and future wrong actions and what I keep secret and what I make known.
You are the One who puts forward and defers. There is no god but You.\"

Some of the transmitters add, \"There is no power nor strength except by
Allah.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1481\. \'A\'isha reported that the Prophet used to make supplication
with these words, \"O Allah, I seek refuge with You from the trial of
the Fire and the punishment of the Fire and from the evil of wealth and
poverty.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1482\. Ziyad ibn \'Ilaqa reported from his uncle, Qutba ibn Malik, that
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"O Allah, I
seek refuge with you from disliked things in respect of character,
actions and erroneous opinions.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1483\. Shakal ibn Humayd said, \"I said, \'Messenger of Allah, teach me
a supplication,\' He said, \'Say: \"O Allah, I seek refuge with You from
the evil of my hearing, the evil of my sight, from the evil of my
tongue, from the evil of my heart and from the evil of my private
parts.\"\'\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1484\. Anas reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, used to say, \"O Allah, I seek refuge with You from white
leprosy, madness, leprosy and all evil defects.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1485\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, used to say, \"O Allah, I seek refuge with You
from hunger. It is a bad bed-fellow. I seek refuge with You from
treachery. It is an evil inward characteristic.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1486\. \'Ali reported that a slave with a contract to buy his freedom
came to him and said, \"I am unable to fulfil my freedom-contract.
Please help me. He said, \'Shall I teach you some words which the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, taught me?
Even if you had a debt the size of a mountain, Allah would pay it for
you. Say: \"O Allah, give me enough of You have made lawful to suffice
me from what You have made unlawful, and enrich me by Your bounty giving
me independence from all other than You.\"\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1487\. \'Imran ibn al-Husayn reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, taught his father Husayn two phrases which he
used when supplicating: \"O Allah, inspire me to be rightly guided and
protect me from the evil of myself.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1488\. Al-\'Abbas ibn \'Abdu\'l-Muttalib said, \"I said, \'O Messenger
of Allah, teach me something I can ask of Allah Almighty.\' He said,
\'Ask Allah for well-being.\' I stayed away some days and then I came
again and said, \'O Messenger of Allah, teach me something I can ask of
Allah Almighty.\' He said to me, \'O \'Abbas, O uncle of the Messenger
of Allah, ask Allah for well-being in this world and in the Next.\'\"
\[at-Tirmidhi\]

1489\. Shahr ibn Hawshab said, \"I said to Umm Salama, \'O Mother of the
believers! What was the most frequent supplication of the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, when he was with you?\'
She said, \'His most frequent supplication was, \"O Turner of the
hearts, make my heart firm in Your deen!\"\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1490\. Abu\'d-Darda\' reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"One of the supplications of
Da\'ud, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,was, \'O Allah, I ask
You for Your love and love for those who love You and for actions which
will bring Your love to me. O Allah, make Your love more beloved to me
than myself, my family and cold water.\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1491\. Anas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Keep reciting \'O Possessor of Majesty and
Nobility.\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi, and an-Nasa\'i related it from Rabi\'a ibn
\'Amir\]\]

1492\. Umama said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, made many supplications which we did not remember at
all. We said, \'Messenger of Allah, you have made many supplications
which we do not remember at all.\' He said, \'Shall I tell something
which will contain all of them for you? You should say. \"O Allah, I ask
You for the good for which Your Prophet Muhammad, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, asked You and I seek refuge from the evil from
which Your Prophet Muhammad, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
sought refuge. You are the One who is asked for help and it is only You
who can transmit it. There is no power nor strength except by
Allah.\"\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1493\. Ibn Mas\'ud said, \"One of the supplications of the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, was, \'O Allah, I ask
You for what makes Your mercy mandatory and for what brings about Your
forgiveness and for safety from every sin and for booty from every act
of piety and for the triumph of gaining the Garden and for safety from
the Fire.\'\" \[al-Hakim\]

**251. Chapter: on the excellence of supplication for those who are
absent**

> Allah says, *\"And those who have come after them say: \'Our Lord,
> forgive us and our brothers who preceded us in faith,\"* (59:10) and
> He says, *\"Ask forgiveness for your wrongdoing, and for the men and
> women who believe.\"* (W47:20; H47:19) The Almighty says, reporting
> from Ibrahim, *\"Our Lord! Forgive me and my parents and the believers
> on the Day the Reckoning takes place.\"* (W14:43; H14:41)

1494\. Abu\'d-Darda\' reported that he heard the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \"There is no Muslim slave who
supplicates for his brother in his absence without an angel saying,
\'And for you the same.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1495\. Abu\'d-Darda\' reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, used to say, \"A supplication which a
Muslim man makes secretly for his brother is answered. At his head is a
guardian angel. Whenever he makes supplication for good for his brother,
the angel who guards him says, \'Amen, and for you the same.\'\"
\[Muslim\]

**252. Chapter: Various matters concerning supplication**

1496\. Usama ibn Zayd reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Whoever has something good done
for him and says to the one who did it, \'May Allah repay your with
good,\' has made full repayment.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1497\. Jabir reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Do not curse each other and do not curse
your children and do not curse your property lest it should coincide
with a time from Allah in which gifts that are asked for are granted.\"
\[Muslim\]

1498\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The closest that a slave of Allah is to
his Lord is while he is prostrating, so make a lot of supplication
then.\" \[Muslim\]

1499\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Each of you will be answered as long as
he does not become over-impatient, saying, \'I called on my Lord and He
did not answer me.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

In a variant of Muslim, \"The slave continues to be answered, provided
he does not pray for a wrong action or severance of kin, as long as he
does not become over-impatient.\" It was said, \"Messenger of Allah,
what is over-impatience?\" He said, \"He says, \'I prayed and I prayed
and I did not find Him answering me,\' so he stops short at that and
ceases making supplication.\"

1500\. Abu Umama said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, was asked, \'What supplication is the most likely to be
heard?\' He said, \'That in the last part of the middle of the night and
after the obligatory prayers.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1501\. \'Ubada ibn as-Samit reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"There is no Muslim on the
earth who supplicates to Allah Almighty with a supplication without
Allah granting it to him, or turning away the like of it in evil from
him, as long as he does not supplicate for anything wrong or severance
from his kin.\" A man of the people said, \"We do it a great deal.\" He
said, \"Allah has more (than you could ever ask for).\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

Al-Hakim has it from the variant of Abu Sa\'id where he added, \"Or the
like of it is stored up for him as a reward.\"

1502\. Ibn \'Abbas stated that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, used to say in affliction, \'There is no god
but Allah, the Immense, the Forbearing. There is no god but Allah, Lord
of the Throne, the Immense. There is no god but Allah, the Lord of the
heavens and the Lord of the earth and the Lord of the Throne, the
Generous.\" \[Agreed upon\]

**253. Chapter: The miracles of the friends of Allah and their
excellence**

> Allah says, *\"Yes, the friends of Allah will feel no fear and will
> know no sorrow: those who believe and are godfearing, there is good
> news for them in the life of this world and in the Next World. There
> is no changing the words of Allah. That is the great victory!\"*
> (10:62-64) The Almighty says*, \"\'Shake the trunk of the palm towards
> you and fresh, ripe dates will drop down onto you. Eat and drink.\'\"*
> (W19:24-25; H19:25-26) and He says, *\"Every time Zakariyya visited
> her in the Upper Room, he found food with her. He said, \'Maryam, how
> did you get this?\' She said, \'It is from Allah. Allah provides for
> whoever He wills without reckoning.\'*\" (3:37) The Almighty says,
> *\"\'When you have separated yourselves from them and everything they
> worship except Allah, take refuge in the cave and your Lord will
> unfold His mercy to you and bring about the best for you in your
> affair.\' You would have seen the sun, when it rose, inclining away
> from their cave towards the right, and, when it set, leaving them
> behind on the left.\"* (18:16-17)

1503\. Abu Muhammad \'Abdu\'r-Rahman ibn Abi Bakr as-Siddiq stated that
the People of the Suffa were poor people and the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \'Whoever has food for two should
invite a third. If he has enough for four, he should invite a fifth or a
sixth,\' or as he said. Abu Bakr took three and the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, took ten. Abu Bakr went to eat with the
Prophet and stayed until after \'Isha\' had been prayed and then went
back again and stayed until the Prophet had eaten. Then Abu Bakr
returned home after as much of the night had passed as Allah willed and
his wife said to him, \'What kept you from your guests?\' He said,
\'Haven\'t you given them their meal?\' She said, \'They refused to eat
until you came. They were offered food and they refused it.\' I went
away and hid. Abu Bakr called out, \'O Ghunthar!\' and derided me and
abused me. Then he said, \'Eat and may you have no welcome,\' adding,
\'By Allah, I will never eat it!\' By Allah, with every mouthful of it
we took, more appeared underneath - until they were full and there was
more food than there had been in the first place. Abu Bakr looked at it
and there was as much as there had been or more and he said to his wife,
\'Sister of the Banu Firas! What is this?\' She said, \'No, apple of my
eye, there is now three times as much as there was before.\' So Abu Bakr
ate from it and said, \'That was from Shaytan,\' meaning his oath. Then
he ate a mouthful of it and took the dish to the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, and it remained with him until the
morning. There had been a treaty between us and some people and it had
come to an end, so he divided us up into twelve men, each of whom had a
group with him - only Allah knows how many there were with each man -
and everyone of them ate from it!\"

In one variant, \"Abu Bakr swore that he would not eat and his wife
swore that she would not eat and the guest - or guests - swore that he -
or they - would not eat until he ate. Abu Bakr said, \'This was from
Shaytan\' and he called for food. He ate and they ate. Every time they
lifted a morsel more than it appeared underneath. He said, \'Sister of
the Banu Firas! What is this?\' She said, \'Apple of my eye, there is
more than there was before we started eating.\' They ate and he sent it
to the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, and
mentioned that he ate from it.\"

In one variant, \"Abu Bakr said to \'Abdu\'r-Rahman, \'Look after your
guests. I am going to the Prophet. Make sure they have been served
before I come back.\' \'Abdu\'r-Rahman went and brought them what they
had. He said, \'Eat.\' They said, \'Where is the master of the house?\'
He said, \'Eat.\' They said, \'We will not eat until the master of the
house comes.\' He said, \'Accept our hospitality. If he comes and you
have not eaten, he will think it terrible.\' They refused.\"
\'Abdu\'r-Rahman said, \"I knew that he would be angry with me, so when
he came, I got out of the way. He said, \'What have you done?\' They
told him and he said, \'\'Abdu\'r-Rahman!\' I was silent. He said,
\'\'Abdu\'r-Rahman!\' I was still silent. He said, \'O Ghunthar! I swear
to you if you hear my voice you had better come!\' I came out and I
said, \'Ask your guests.\' They said, \'He spoke the truth. He brought
it to us.\' He said, \'You waited for me! By Allah, I will not eat it
tonight!\' The others said, \'By Allah, we will not eat it until you eat
it!\' He said, \'Bother you! Why don\'t you accept our hospitality from
us? Bring the food!\' It was brought and he put his hand down and said,
\'In the name of Allah. The first was from Shaytan.\' He ate and they
ate.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1504\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"In the nations before you there were
people who were spoken to (by Allah). If there was to be such a man
among my community, it would be \'Umar.\" \[al-Bukhari. Muslim transmits
it from \'A\'isha.\]

1505\. Jabir ibn Samura said, \"The people of Kufa complained about
Sa\'d, i.e. ibn Abi Waqqas to \'Umar ibn al-Khattab and he dismissed him
and appointed \'Ammar over them. One of their complaints was that he did
not do the prayer correctly. \'Umar sent to him and said, \'Abu Ishaq!
These people claim that you do not do the prayer correctly.\' Abu Ishaq
said, \'By Allah, I prayed with them the prayer of the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, without diminishing it.
When I prayed \'Isha\' I made the first two rak\'ats long and the last
two short.\' \'Umar said, \'That is what one would have expected of you,
Abu Ishaq.\' He sent a couple of men with him to Kufa to ask the people
of Kufa about him and they asked about him in every mosque they visited.
Everyone praised his correctness until they came to the mosque of the
Banu \'Abs. One of their men called Usama ibn Qatada with the kunya of
Abu Sa\'da, stood up and said, \'Since you ask us under oath, Sa\'d did
not himself go out on military expeditions, he did not divide the booty
equally nor was he just in giving judgement.\' Sa\'d said, \'By Allah, I
pray for three things. O Allah, if this slave of Yours is a liar, and
has got up just to show off, then make him live long, be poor long and
expose him to trials.\' After that whenever he was asked, the man would
say, \'I am an old man tested and afflicted by the prayer of Sa\'d.\'\"

\'Abdu\'l-Malik ibn \'Umayr ar-Rawi said from Jabir ibn Samura, \"I saw
him later and his eyebrows were hanging down over his eyes due to old
age. He would accost young girls in the streets and pinch them.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1506\. \'Urwa ibn az-Zubayr reported that Sa\'id ibn Zayd ibn \'Umar ibn
Nufayl had litigation instigated against him by Arwa bint Aws before
Marwan ibn al-Hakam. She claimed that he had taken some of her land.
Sa\'id said, \"Would I take any of her land after what I heard from the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace?\" He said,
\"What did you hear from the Messenger of Allah?\" He said, \"I heard
the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say,
\'Anyone who wrongfully takes a hand\'s width of land will wear it round
his neck down through seven earths.\'\" Marwan said to him, \"I will not
ask you for evidence after this.\" Sa\'id said, \"O Allah, if she is
lying, make her lose her eyesight and kill her in her land!\" He said,
\"She did not die before her eyesight had gone, and while she was
walking in her land, she fell into a pit and died.\" \[Agreed upon\]

A variant of Muslim from Muhammad ibn Zayd ibn \'Abdullah ibn \'Umar has
something to the same effect and says that he saw her blind, groping for
the wall, saying, \"The invocation of Sa\'id has struck me.\" She passed
by a well in the house regarding which she had litigated and fell into
it and it became her grave.

1507\. Jabir ibn \'Abdullah said, \"When Uhud was near, my father called
me in the night and said, \'I think that I will be among the first of
the Companions of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
to be slain. I do not leave after me anyone dearer to me than you except
for the soul of the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace. I have debts, so repay them and treat your sisters well.\' In
the morning, he was the first to be killed and was buried together with
someone else in a grave. I was not happy to leave him with the other
person, so six months later I took him out and he was as he had been on
the day I put him in, except for a small place on his ear.\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

1508\. Anas stated that two of the Companions of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, left the Prophet on a dark night with
something like two lamps in front of them. When they parted, one of
these things accompanied each of them until he reached his home.\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

In some variants the two men were Usayd ibn Hudayr and \'Abbad ibn
Bishr.

1509\. Abu Hurayra said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, sent out ten men on a scouting expedition and put
\'Asim ibn Thabit al-Ansari in command of them. They proceeded until
they reached Had\'a, which is between \'Usfan and Makka. Their presence
was reported to a branch of Hudhayl called the Banu Lihyan. About a
hundred men, who were all archers, set out after them. They followed
their tracks. When \'Asim and his companions perceived them, they took
cover. The people surrounded them and said, \'Come down and give
yourselves up! You have protection and assurance that we will not kill
any of you!\' \'Asim ibn Thabit said, \'O people! As for me, I will not
come down into the protection of an unbeliever! O Allah, inform Your
Prophet about us!\' They shot at them with arrows and killed \'Asim. A
group of three came down, accepting the offer of protection and
security. They included Khubayb al-Ansari, Zayd ibn Dathina, and another
man. When they had them in their power, they undid their bow-strings and
tied them up. Then the third man said, \'This is the beginning of
treachery! By Allah, I will not accompany you! There is a good example
in these!\' i.e. those who had been killed. They dragged him and tried
to persuade him to accompany them. He refused, so they killed him. They
took Khubayb and Zayd ibn Dathina and sold them in Makka after the
Battle of Badr. The sons of al-Harith ibn \'Amir ibn Nawfal ibn \'Abdu
Manaf bought Khubayb. Khubayb was the man who had killed al-Harith in
the Battle of Badr. So Khubayb remained a prisoner with them until they
agreed on killing him. He asked to borrow a razor from one of the
daughters of al-Harith with which to shave his private parts and she
lent it to him. A son of hers went right up to him when she was not
paying attention. She found him sitting on his knee and the razor was in
his hand. She was so alarmed that Khubayb noticed it and said, \'Are you
afraid that I will kill him? I would never do that.\' She said, \'By
Allah, I never saw a better prisoner than Khubayb. By Allah, one day I
found him eating from a bunch of grapes he had in his hand, when he was
shackled in irons and there was no fruit in Makka.\' She used to say,
\'It was provision from Allah which He gave to Khubayb.\' When they
brought him out of the Haram to kill him in profane land, Khubayb said
to them, \'Let me pray two rak\'ats.\' They let him pray two rak\'ats.
Then he said, \'By Allah, were it not that you might think that I was
afraid, I would have made them longer. O Allah, reckon them one by one,
every one of them and kill them one by one and do not spare any of
them!\' He then said:

> \'I do not care what manner death I die
>
>         if I am slain as a Muslim!
>
> That is for the sake of Allah, and if He wills,
>
>        He can bless the joints of a torn limb!\'\"

\"It was Khubayb who made the sunna for every Muslim man who is killed
in detention to pray two *rak\'ats*. The Prophet, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, informed his Companions about them on the day they
fell. When they were informed that \'Asim ibn Thabit had been killed,
some of the unbelievers of Quraysh were sent to bring part of him that
could be recognised. He had killed one of their great men on the Day of
Badr. Allah sent over \'Asim a swarm of bees like a cloud and it
protected him from their messengers and they could not cut off any part
of him.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1510\. Ibn \'Umar said, \"I never heard \'Umar say about anything, \'I
think it is like such-and-such,\' without the thing being as he had
thought it was.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Previous Page](riyad6.html)**

**[Next Page](riyad8.html)**

[**Return to Home Page**](index.html)
