**[Book on Things which are Forbidden]{#forbidden}**

**254. Chapter: The prohibition against backbiting and the command to
guard the tongue**

> Allah says, *\"Do not backbite one another Would any of you like to
> eat his brother\'s dead flesh? No, you would hate it ÉBut have taqwa
> of Allah. Allah is Ever-Returning, Most Merciful,\"* (49:12) and He
> says, *\"Do not pursue what of which you have no knowledge of hearing,
> sight, and hearts will all be questioned.*\" (17:36) Allah says*, \"He
> does not utter a single word without a watcher by him, pen in hand.\"*
> (50:18)

1511\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who believes in Allah and the Last Day,
should speak good words or be silent.\" \[Agreed upon\]

This hadith clearly indicates that he should not speak unless the words
he speaks are good. That means speech whose benefit is clear. If there
is any doubt about benefit occurring, he should not speak.

1512\. Abu Musa said, \"I said, \'Messenger of Allah, whose Islam is
best?\' He said, \'The one from whose tongue and hands the Muslims are
safe.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1513\. Sahl ibn Sa\'d reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who safeguards for My sake
what is between his jaws and what is between his legs, I will safeguard
the Garden for him.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1514\. Abu Hurayra reported that he heard the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, say, \"A slave of Allah might say something,
without realising its seriousness, which causes him to slip into the
Fire by a greater margin than the distance between the east and the
west.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1515\. Abu Hurayra is that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, said, \"A slave of Allah might say something which pleases
Allah Almighty without realising it on account of which Allah raises him
some degrees. A slave of Allah might say something which angers Allah
Almighty without realising it on account of which he falls into
Jahannam.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1516\. Abu \'Abdu\'r-Rahman Bilal ibn al-Harith al-Muzani reported that
the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said,
\"A man may say something which pleases Allah Almighty without him
realising the full extent of its implication, and because of it, Allah
prescribes His pleasure for him until the Day he meets Him. And a man
may likewise say something which angers Allah without him realising the
full extent of its implication, and because of it, Allah prescribes His
wrath for him until the Day he meets Him. \[Malik in al-Muwatta\' and
at-Tirmidhi\]

1517\. Sufyan ibn \'Abdullah said, \"I said, \'Messenger of Allah, tell
me something I can cling to.\' He said, \'Say: \"My Lord is Allah\" and
then go straight.\' I said, \'Messenger of Allah, what is the thing you
fear most for me?\' He took hold of his tongue and then said,
\'This.\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1518\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Do not say much without mentioning
Allah. A lot of talk without mentioning Allah Almighty makes people\'s
hearts hard. The furthest of people from Allah are the hard-hearted.\"
\[at-Tirmidhi\]

1519\. Abu Hurayra said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \'Anyone whom Allah protects from the evil of
what is between his jaws and the evil of what is between his legs will
enter the Garden.\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1520\. \'Uqba ibn \'Amir said, \"I said, \'Messenger of Allah, what
ensures safety?\' He said, \'Holding your tongue, keeping to your house
and weeping for your sins.\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1521\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"When the son of Adam starts the day,
all his limbs supplicate his tongue, saying, \'Fear Allah in respect of
us. We move by you. If you go straight, we go straight. If you go
crooked, we go crooked.\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1522\. Mu\'adh said, \"I said, \'Messenger of Allah, tell me of an
action which will admit me to the Garden and keep me far from the
Fire.\' He said, \'You have asked about a great matter, but it is easy
for the one to whom Allah Almighty makes it easy: worship Allah and do
not associate anything with Him, do the prayer, pay the zakat, fast
Ramadan and go on hajj to the House.\' Then he said, \'Shall I direct
you to the gates of good? Fasting, which is a protection, and *sadaqa*,
which extinguishes mistakes as water extinguishes fire, and the prayer
of a man in the middle of the night.\' Then he recited, *\'Their sides
eschew their beds\'* until he reached *\'what it used to do.\'
(32:16-17)* Then he said, \'Shall I tell you of the head of the matter,
its support and its peak?\' I said, \'Yes indeed, Messenger of Allah.\'
He said, \'The head of the matter is Islam and its support is the prayer
and its peak is jihad.\' Then he said, \'Shall I tell you of the
foundation of all that?\' I said, \'Yes, indeed, Messenger of Allah.\'
He took hold of his tongue and said, \'Restrain this.\' I said,
\'Messenger of Allah, will we be taken to task for what we say ?\' He
said, \'May your mother be bereaved! Are people thrown on their faces
into the Fire for anything but the harvest of their tongues?\'\"
\[at-Tirmidhi\]

1523\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Do you know what backbiting is?\" They
said, \"Allah and His Messenger know best.\" He said, \"To mention your
brother in a manner he dislikes.\" It was said, \"What if my brother is
as I say?\" He said, \"If he is as you said, you have backbitten him. If
he is not as you said, you have slandered him.\" \[Muslim\]

1524\. Abu Bakra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said in his khutba on the Day of Sacrifice
during the Farewell Hajj, \"Your blood, your property and your honour
are sacred to you, like the sacredness of this day in this month in this
city. Have I not conveyed it?\" \[Agreed upon\]

1525\. \'A\'isha said, \"I said to the Prophet, \'Such-and-such should
be enough for you in respect of Safiyya.\' (Some of the transmitters say
that she meant her shortness.) He said, \'You have said something that,
if it were mixed with the water of the ocean, would still pollute it!\'
\[She said,\] I said, \'I related something unpleasant about someone to
him and he said, \"I would not like to relate anything unpleasant about
someone, even if I were to receive such-and-such a thing \[for doing
it\].\"\'\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1526\. Anas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"When I ascended through the heavens, I
passed by some people holding copper nails with which they were gouging
their faces and chests. I said, \'Who are these, Jibril?\' He said,
\'Those are the people who consumed people\'s flesh and attacked their
honour.\'\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1527\. Abu Hurayra stated that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The blood, honour and property of every
Muslim is sacred for another Muslim.\" \[Muslim\]

**255. Chapter: On the prohibition against listening to backbiting. The
command that someone who hears backbiting should refute it or object to
it being said. If he is unable to do that or the speaker does not accept
his objection, then he should leave that gathering if he can.**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"When they hear worthless talk, they turn away
> from it,\"* (28:55) and the Almighty says, *\"Those who turn away from
> worthless talk.\"* (23:3) The Almighty says, *\"Hearing, sight and
> hearts will be questioned,\"* (17:36) and the Almighty says, *\"When
> you see people engrossed in mockery of Our signs, turn away from them
> until they start to talk of other things. And if Shaytan should cause
> you to forget, once you remember, do not stay sitting with the
> wrongdoers.\"* (6:68)

1528\. Abu\'d-Darda\' reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"On the Day of Rising Allah will defend from the
Fire the face of anyone who defends the honour of his brother.\"
\[at-Tirmidhi\]

1529\. \'Itban ibn Malik said in the famous long hadith which was
reported from him in the chapter on hope, \"The Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, stood up to pray and said, \'Where
is Malik ibn ad-Dukhshum?\' A man said, \'That man is a hypocrite who
does not love Allah and His Messenger.\' The Prophet said, \'Do not say
that. Do you not see that he has said, \"There is no god but Allah,\"
desiring by that only the face of Allah? Allah has forbidden the Fire
for anyone who says \"There is no god but Allah\" desiring by that the
face of Allah.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1530\. Ka\'b ibn Malik said in his long hadith about the story of his
repentance which was given in the Chapter of Repentance, \"While he was
sitting among the people at Tabuk, the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \'What has Ka\'b ibn Malik done? A man of the
Banu Salima said, \'O Messenger of Allah, he has been held back by his
two cloaks and self-conceit.\' Mu\'adh ibn Jabal said to him, \'What an
evil thing to say! By Allah, Messenger of Allah, we only know good of
him!\' The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
was silent.\" \[Agreed upon\]

**256. Chapter: On what is permitted in talking about people**

> Know that talking about people is permitted for a sound legal reason
> which can only be realised by doing that. There are six reasons for
> which it is allowed:
>
> 1\. Being a victim of injustice. The person who has been wronged is
> permitted to complain about that to the ruler or qadi or others in
> authority or those who have the power to rectify the injustice. He
> says, \"So-and-so has wronged me.\"
>
> 2\. Seeking help to alter something objectionable or to return someone
> who disobeys Allah to the correct path. He says to the one he hopes
> will remove what is objectionable (*munkar*), \"So-and-so is doing
> such-and-such, so restrain him from it. That is allowed if his aim is
> to remove that objectionable. Otherwise it is forbidden.
>
> 3\. Asking for a fatwa. He says to the mufti, \"My father (brother,
> spouse or so-and-so) has wronged me by such-and-such. Can he do that?
> How can I be saved from it and obtain my right and remove the
> injustice?\" This is permitted as it is legal argument, but it is
> better to be more circumspect and say, \"What do you say about a man,
> person or spouse who does such-and-such?\" Then he will obtain what he
> desires without mentioning him specifically, although it is
> nonetheless permitted to mention him specifically.
>
> 4\. Warning the Muslims about evil and advising them. There are
> various forms of that. Part of that is invalidating the testimony of
> witnesses and transmitters. That is permitted by consensus. Indeed, it
> is mandatory because of need. Another instance is consultation about
> someone as a potential in-law, partner, keeper of a deposit or
> employee, or the like, or neighbour. Then the one consulted must not
> conceal his state and must mention his bad qualities with the aim of
> giving good advice. Another case is when someone sees someone learning
> fiqh frequenting an innovator or impious person to study with them and
> he fears that the student of fiqh will be harmed by that. Then he must
> give him good advice by explaining the person\'s situation, always
> provided that his intention is to give advice. This is something in
> which it is possible to err and the speaker may be moved by envy to do
> that and Shaytan confuses the matter for him so that he imagines that
> it is good advice. Another case is when someone has guardianship which
> he does not administer properly, either because he does not deal
> properly with it, or is impious or neglectful or the like. Then it is
> obliged to mention that to the one with general authority so that he
> can remove it and appoint someone who will look after it properly, or
> in order that he knows that about him so that he can deal with him
> appropriately and not be deceived by him.
>
> 5\. When someone is open about his impiety or innovation, like someone
> who drinks wine openly, oppresses people, imposes tolls on people and
> taxes property unjustly and engages in false matters. What he does
> openly is mentioned, but it is forbidden to mention other faults he
> has unless it is for another justifiable cause.
>
> 6\. Recognition. When a person is known by a nickname, like al-A\'mash
> (the blear-eyed), al-A\'raj (the lame), al-Asamm (the deaf), and the
> like, it is permitted that they be known as that but it is forbidden
> to use it to deprecate them. It is better if there is another way of
> identifying the person.
>
> These are six reasons which scholars mentioned and there is agreement
> on most of them. The evidence for that in sound hadiths is well-known.

1531\. \'A\'isha reported that a man asked permission to visit the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, and he said, \'Give
him permission. He is an evil brother of the tribe.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

Al-Bukhari used it as a proof for the permissibility of speaking ill of
the people of corruption and people of doubt.

1532\. \'A\'isha reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"I do not think that so-and-so and
so-and-so know anything about our deen.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

Al-Layth ibn Sa\'d, one of the transmitters of this hadith, said,
\"These two men were among the hypocrites.\"

1533\. Fatima bint Qays said, \"I went to the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, and said, \'Abu\'l-Jahm and Mu\'awiya have both
proposed marriage to me.\' The Messenger of Allah said, \'Mu\'awiya is
poor and without property. Abu\'l-Jahm does not put down the staff from
his shoulder.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

In a version of Muslim, \"As for Abu\'l-Jahm, he beats women,\" which
explains the transmission, \"He does not put down the staff from his
shoulder.\" It is also said to mean he travels a lot.

1534\. Zayd ibn Arqam said, \"We went out with the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, on a journey during which the
people suffered considerable hardship. \'Abdullah ibn Ubayy said, \'Do
not spend on those who are with the Messenger of Allah so that they
become disunited.\' He said, \'When we return to Madina, the mightier
will drive out the humbler from it.\' I went to the Messenger of Allah
and told him that and he sent for \'Abdullah ibn Ubayy who took a strong
oath swearing that he had not said it. They said, \'Zayd has lied to the
Messenger of Allah,\" and I felt great distress inside me because of
what they had said until Allah Almighty sent down a confirmation (of
what I had said): *\'When the hypocrites come to you\...\'* (63). Then
the Messenger of Allah , may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
invited them in order to ask forgiveness for them but they arrogantly
turned their heads away.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1535\. \'A\'isha said, \"Hind, the wife of Abu Sufyan, asked the
Prophet, \'Abu Sufyan is miserly and does not give me enough for me and
my children unless I take it from him without his knowledge.\' He said,
\'Take what is reasonably enough for you and your children.\'\" \[Agreed
upon\]

**257. Chapter: On the prohibition against slander, which is carrying
tales between people in order to create trouble**

> Allah says, *\"A backbiter, slandermonger,\"* (68:11) and He says,
> *\"He does not utter a single word without a watcher by him, pen in
> hand.*\" (50:18)

1536\. Hudhayfa reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"A slanderer will not enter the
Garden.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1537\. Ibn \'Abbas reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, passed by two graves and said, \"They are being
punished and not for anything very great. One of them did not guard
himself from urine and the other was involved in back-biting.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

The scholars say the meaning of \"not for anything very great\" is as
they claim.

1538\. Ibn Mas\'ud reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Shall I tell you what slander is? It is
backbiting bandied about among people.\" \[Muslim\]

**258. Chapter: On the prohibition against carrying tales and things
that people have said to those in authority if there is no need for
that, for instance, fear of corruption, etc.**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Do not help one another to wrongdoing and
> enmity.\"* (5:2)

1539\. Ibn Mas\'ud reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"None of my Companions should convey to
me anything bad about someone else. I want to come out to you with a
clear heart.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

**259. Chapter: on the censure of being two-faced**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"They try to conceal themselves from people,
> but they cannot conceal themselves from Allah. He is with them when
> they spend the night saying things which are not pleasing to Him.
> Allah encompasses everything they do.\"* (W4:107;4:108)

1540\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"You will find people to be mines. The
best of them in the *Jahiliyya* are the best of them in Islam when they
have understanding. You will find the best of people in this business
(of command) to be those who dislike it the most, and you will find the
worst of people are the two-faced who come to these people with one face
and those people with another face.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1541\. Muhammad ibn Zayd said that some people said to his grandfather,
\'Abdullah ibn \'Umar, \"We visit our sultans and speak differently to
them than we do when we leave them.\" He said, \"In the time of the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, we used to
consider this hypocrisy.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

**260. Chapter: On the prohibition against lying**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Do not pursue what you have no knowledge
> of,\"* (17:36) and the Almighty says*, \"He does not utter a single
> word without a watcher by him, pen in hand.\"* (50:18)

1542\. Ibn Mas\'ud stated that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Truthfulness leads to piety and piety
leads to the Garden. A man should be truthful until he is written down
as truthful with Allah. Lying leads to deviance and deviance leads to
the Fire. A man will lie until he is written down as a liar with
Allah.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1543\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr is that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"If anyone has four characteristics, he is a
pure hypocrite, and if anyone has one of them, he has an aspect of
hypocrisy until he gives it up: whenever he is trusted, he betrays his
trust; whenever he speaks, he lies; when he makes an agreement, he
breaks it; and when he quarrels, he deviates from the truth by speaking
falsely.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1544\. Ibn \'Abbas reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who relates a dream which he has not
really had will have to tie a knot between two grains of barley and will
not be able to do it. Anyone who listens to people talking when they do
not want him to, will have molten lead poured into his ears on the Day
of Rising. Anyone who makes an image will be punished and have to breath
a spirit into it but will not be able to do it.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1545\. Ibn \'Umar reported said that the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"The worst of lies is when a man says his
eyes have seen something which they have not seen.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

It means that he says he has dreamt what he did not dream.

1546\. Samura ibn Jundub said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, would often say to his Companions, \'Who among
you had a dream last night?\' Then anyone who Allah willed would recount
his dream. One morning he said to us, \'During the night two men came to
me and said to me, \"Come on!\" So I went with them. We came to a man
who was lying on his back while another man was standing over him with a
stone which he dropped onto his head and crushed it. Then the stone
rolled away from him and he went after the stone to retrieve it. When he
returned to him, his head was whole again and had become as it had been
in the first place. So he went back and hit him as he had done the first
time. I said to them, \"Glory be to Allah! Who are these two?\" They
said, \"Go on! Go on!\" We went on and came to a man lying on his back
and there was another man standing over him with an iron hook. He went
to one side of his face and cut open the side of his mouth until it
reached the back of his neck and then his nostril to the back of his
neck and his eye to the back of his neck. Then he moved to the other
side and did the same thing as he had done to first side. When he
finished that side, the first side had become whole again. Then he did
the same thing all over again.\" He said, \'I said, \"Glory be to Allah!
Who are these two?\" They said to me, \"Go on! Go on!\" and we went on
until we came upon something like an oven.\'\" I think he said, \"\'In
it was a babble and shouting. We looked down into it and it contained
naked men and women. The flames would come at them from underneath, and
when those flames reached them, they cried out. I said, \"Who are
they?\" They said, \"Go on! Go on!\" and we went on until we came to a
river.\'\" I think that he said, \"\'Red like blood. In the river there
was a man swimming and on the bank of the river was a man who had many
stones with him. When that swimmer swam and reached the one who had
gathered the stones, he force his mouth open and make him swallow a
stone. Then he would begin to swim and would come back to him again.
Whenever he came back to him, he forced open his mouth and made him
swallow a stone. I said to them, \"Who are these two?\" They said to me,
\"Go on! Go on!\" and we went on until we came to a man with a repulsive
appearance - or the most repulsive man you have ever seen. He was at a
fire which he was kindling and which he was running around. I said to
them, \"Who is this?\' They said to me, \"Go on! Go on!\" and we went on
until we came to a green meadow with every type of spring flower in it.
There was in the middle of the meadow a man so tall that I could
scarcely see his head, so high it was in the sky. Around the man were
the greatest number of children I have ever seen. I said, \"Who is this?
Who are those?\" They said to me, \"Go on! Go on!\" and we went on until
we reached a huge tree and I have never seen any tree bigger or more
beautiful than it. They said to me, \"Climb it.\" We climbed it and came
to a city built of gold and silver bricks. We came to the door of the
city and asked for it to be opened and it was opened for us and we
entered it. We were met by men half of whose physique was the most
beautiful you have ever seen and the other half was the ugliest you have
ever seen. The two said to them, \"Go and plunge into that river.\"
There was a wide river flowing there whose water was pure white. They
went and jumped into it and when they returned to us, that evil had left
them and they had the most beautiful form.\' He said, \'They said to me,
\"This is the Garden of Eden, and that is your place.\" I raised my eyes
upwards and there was a castle like a white cloud. They said to me,
\"This is your place.\" I said to them, \"May Allah bless you, let me
enter it.\" They said, \"No, not now. But you will enter it.\" I said to
them, \"This night I have seen marvels, but what are these things which
I have seen?\'\" They said to me, \"We will tell you. The first man to
whom you came whose head was being crushed with the stone is a man who
memorised the Qur\'an and then abandoned it and slept through the
obligatory prayers. As for the man you came to whose jaw was split to
his neck, whose nostril to his neck and whose eye to his neck, he was a
man who went from his house and told lies which spread everywhere. As
for the naked men and women who were in something like an oven, they
were adulterers and adulteresses. The man you came to who was swimming
in the river and being made to swallow stones used to consume usury. The
man with the disagreeable appearance who was at the fire, kindling it
and running around it was Malik, the guardian of Jahannam. The tall man
in the meadow was Ibrahim. The children who were around him are all
those who were born and died in the natural state. \[The variant of
al-Barqani has, \'born in the natural state.\'\]\'\"

One of the Muslims asked, \"Messenger of Allah, the children of the
idolaters as well?\" The Messenger of Allah said, \"The children of the
idolaters as well.\" \'\"As for the people who were half beautiful and
half ugly, they are the people who mixed righteous actions with evil
actions. Allah overlooked them.\"\'\" \[al-Bukhari\]

In one of the variants of al-Bukhari, \"But in the night I dreamt that
two men came to me and took me by the hand and brought me to the Holy
Land.\" Then he mentioned it and said, \"We went on until we came upon a
hole like an oven. Its top was narrow and its bottom wide, and there was
a fire kindled under it. When the flames flared up, the people were
lifted until they were almost out and when it subsided, they returned
into it. It contained naked men and women.\" In it is, \"until we came
to a river of blood in the middle of which there was a man standing
together with another man carrying some stones in front of him. The man
in the river came forward and when he tried to get out, the other man
threw a stone into his mouth and he went back to where he had been
before. Whenever he tried to get out, the other would throw a stone in
his mouth and he would go back to where he had been before.\" In it is,
\"The two men made me climb the tree and took me into a house which was
more beautiful than any I had ever seen. In it were some old men, young
men, women and children.\" In it is, \"As for the one you saw whose jaw
was being torn open, he was liar who told lies that were relayed from
him until they spread everywhere. So that is what will be done to him
until the Day of Rising,\" and \"The man you saw whose head was being
crushed was someone to whom Allah had taught the Qur\'an who used to
sleep without reciting it at night and did not act by it during the day.
That will be done to him until the Day of Rising.\" And, \"The first
house you entered was the house of the generality of believers. This
house is the house of those killed fighting in the way of Allah. I am
Jibril and this is Mika\'il. Raise your head.\" I raised my head and
above me was something like a cloud. They said, \"This is your destined
place.\" I said, \"Let me enter my place.\" They said, \"You still have
some of your life left which has not been completed. If it were
complete, you would have come to your place.\"

**261. Chapter: On the clarification of what lying is permitted**

> Know that lying, even if it is basically forbidden, is permitted in
> certain cases with certain preconditions which I explained in the
> *Kitab al-Adhkar*. In brief, words are a means to ends. If any goal
> which is praiseworthy can be obtained without lying, then it is
> forbidden to lie in it. If it can only be obtained by lying, then it
> is permitted to lie. If the goal is permissible, then the lie is
> permissible, and if the goal is mandatory, then lying is mandatory. If
> a Muslim is hiding from a wrongdoer who wants to kill him or take his
> property which he has hidden and a man is asked about him, it is
> mandatory to lie to conceal him. The same is true if he has a deposit
> and a wrongdoer wants to take it: he must lie to conceal it. It is
> more circumspect for him to use allusion and to employ expressions
> which are not lies in themselves although they give a false
> impression. If he actually lies, it is not forbidden in such a case.
>
> Scholars find the permission to lie in this case in the hadith of Umm
> Kulthum who heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
> grant him peace, say, \"The one who puts things right between people
> and produces (or says) good is not a liar.\" \[Agreed upon\]
>
> Muslim\'s variant adds, \"Umm Kulthum said, \"I did not hear him make
> an allowance regarding anything that people say except in three cases:
> in war, putting things right between people, and what a man says to
> his wife and a wife says to her husband.

**262. Chapter: On the encouragement to verify what one says and
relates**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Do not pursue what you have no knowledge
> of,\"* (17:36) and the Almighty says, *\"He does not utter a single
> word without a watcher by him, pen in hand.\"* (50:18)

1547\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"It is enough of a lie for a man to talk about
everything he hears.\" \[Muslim\]

1548\. Samura reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who relates a hadith as coming from
me while considering it a false report is one of the liars.\" \[Muslim\]

1549\. Asma\' reported that a woman said, \"Messenger of Allah, I have a
co-wife. Would it be a sin if I were to pretend to have received
something from my husband which he has not given me?\" The Prophet, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace,said, \"Anyone who pretends to have
received something he has not been given is like someone who wears two
spurious garments \[i.e. someone who dresses up to give a false
impression\].\" \[Agreed upon\]

**263. Chapter: On the clarification of the severe prohibition against
giving false witness**

> Allah says*, \"And have done with telling lies,\"* (W22:28: 22:30) and
> the Almighty says*, \"Do not pursue what you have no knowledge of,\"*
> (17:36) and the Almighty says, *\"He does not utter a single word
> without a watcher by him, pen in hand.\"* (50:18) and the Almighty
> says, *\"Your Lord is always lying in wait.\"* (89:14) The Almighty
> says, *\"Those who do not bear false witness.\"* (25:72)

1550\. Abu Bakr said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \'Shall I inform you of the greatest of wrong
actions?\' We said, \'Please do, Messenger of Allah!\' He said,
\'Associating with Allah, disobedience to parents.\' He had been
reclining and now sat up and said, \'And false witness.\' He continued
to repeat it until we said, \'I wish he would be quiet.\'\" \[Agreed
upon\]

**264. Chapter: On the prohibition against cursing a man or an animal**

1551\. Abu Zayd Thabit ibn ad-Dahhak al-Ansari, one of the people of the
Pledge of Ridwan, said that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who deliberately swears a false oath
that he will adopt another religion than Islam \[if he is not telling
the truth\], it will be as he said. Anyone who kills himself with
something, will be punished with that thing on the Day of Rising. An
oath which is a man is incapable of fulfilling is not binding on him.
Cursing a believer is like killing him.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1552\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"It is not fitting for a truthful man to
be someone who curses.\" \[Muslim\]

1553\. Abu\'d-Darda\' reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"People who curse will not be
intercessors nor witnesses on the Day of Rising.\" \[Muslim\]

1554\. Samura ibn Jundub reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Do not curse one another with
Allah\'s curse or His anger or the Fire.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1555\. Ibn Mas\'ud reported said that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"A believer is not an attacker nor
a curser nor someone obscene or abusive.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1556\. Abu\'d-Darda\' reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"If a slave of Allah curses
something, the curse rises to the heaven and the gates of heaven are
locked against it. Then it falls to the earth and the gates of the earth
are locked against it and then it goes to the right and to the left and
when it does not find any entrance, it returns to that which was cursed
if it deserves it. Otherwise it returns to the one who said it.\" \[Abu
Dawud\]

1557\. \'Imran ibn al-Husayn said, \"On one of the journeys of the
Messenger of Allah there was a woman of the Ansar on a she-camel. It was
recalcitrant and she cursed it. The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, heard that and said, \'Take off what is on it
and let it go. It is cursed.\'\" \'Imran said, \"It is as if I could see
it now walking among the people and no one turned to it.\" \[Muslim\]

1558\. Abu Barza Nadla ibn \'Ubayd al-Aslami said, \"On one occasion a
slavegirl was on a camel with some people\'s goods and she saw the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace. The mountains were
hemming them in and she said, \'Move! O Allah, curse it!\' The Prophet
said, \'A she-camel bearing a curse will not accompany us.\'\"
\[Muslim\]

The meaning of this hadith is unclear even if there is no unambiguity in
it. What is meant is that that camel was forbidden to accompany them. It
is not a prohibition against selling it, slaughtering it or riding it
not in the company of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace. All those uses are permitted and not forbidden with the sole
exception of being in his company. Allah knows best.

**265. Chapter: On the permission to curse some of those who rebel
against Allah without specifying them**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Allah\'s curse is on the wrongdoers,\"*
> (11:18) and the Almighty says, *\"Between them a herald will proclaim,
> \'May the curse of Allah is on the wrongdoers.\"* (7:44)

> It is affirmed in the *Sahih* that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
> bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Allah has cursed anyone who
> joins hair together and the person asks for it to be joined, \"Allah
> has cursed the one who consumes usury,\" \"He has cursed those make
> images\", \"Allah has cursed the one who alters the borders of the
> land,\" \"Allah curses the thief who steals an egg,\" \'Allah curses
> the one who curses his parents,\" and \"Allah curses the one who
> sacrifices to other than Allah.\" He also said, \"If someone innovates
> in it or shelters an innovator, the curse of Allah, the angels and all
> people is on him,\" and \"O Allah, curse Ri\'l, Dhakwan, \'Usayya:
> they have disobeyed Allah and His Messenger.\" (These were three Arabs
> tribes.) He said, \"Allah has cursed the Jews who took the graves of
> their Prophets as mosques\" and \"Allah has cursed men who try to look
> like women and women who try to look like men.\"
>
> All of these expressions are sound and some are in the *Sahih*
> collections of al-Bukhari and Muslim, and some of them are in one of
> the two collections. We simply indicated them here for the sake of
> brevity and most are mentioned in various chapters of this book.

**266. Chapter: On the prohibition against abusing a Muslim without
cause**

> Allah Almighty says*, \"And those who abuse believing men and woman,
> when they have not merited it, bear the weight of slander and clear
> wrongdoing.\"* (33:58)

1559\. Ibn Mas\'ud reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Insulting a Muslim is going off the
path (fusuq) and killing him is disbelief.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1560\. Abu Dharr stated that he heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \"A man does not accuse another man
of iniquity \[*fisq*\] or disbelief without that reverting to him if the
other man does not have what is imputed to him.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1561\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"If people insult one another, the sin
of what they say falls exclusively on the one of them who initiated it
unless the one wronged exceeds the bounds.\" \[Muslim\]

1562\. Abu Hurayra said, \"A man who had drunk wine was brought to the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, and he said, \'Beat
him.\'\" Abu Hurayra said, \"Some of us beat him with their hands and
some beat him with sandals and some beat him with their garments. One of
the people said, \'May Allah disgrace you!\' He said, \'Do not say that.
Do not help Shaytan with him.\'\". \[al-Bukhari\]

1563\. Abu Hurayra said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \'Anyone who falsely accuses his
slave of fornication, will have the hadd-punishment carried out on him
on the Day of Rising if the case is not as he said it was.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

**267. Chapter: On the prohibition against abusing the dead without
cause and benefit in the Shari\'a**

> That is cautioning against following his innovation, impiety and the
> like of that.

1564\. \'A\'isha reported that the Messenger of Allah , may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Do not curse the dead. They have
arrived at what they sent ahead.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

**268. Chapter: On forbidding injury**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"And those who abuse believing men and woman,
> when they have not merited it, bear the weight of slander and clear
> wrongdoing.\"* (33:58)

1565\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"A Muslim is the one from whose tongue
and hand the Muslims are safe. An emigrant (*muhajir*) is someone who
abandons what Allah has forbidden.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1566\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr ibn al-\'As reported that the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who wants
to be far from the Fire and to enter the Garden must die believing in
Allah and the Last Day, and should only give to other people what he
would like to be given to himself.\" \[Muslim\]

**269. Chapter: On forbidding mutual rancour, cutting one other off and
mutual hostility**

> Allah says, *\"The believers are brothers\"* (49:10) and the Almighty
> says, *\"Humble to the believers, fierce to the unbelievers.\"* (5:54)
> The Almighty says, *\"Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah; and those
> who are with him are fierce to the unbelievers, merciful to one
> another.*\" (48:29)

1567\. Anas reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said, \"Do not hate one another nor envy one another nor act in a
hostile way towards one another nor cut one another off. Be slaves of
Allah, brothers. It is not lawful for a Muslim to cut himself off from
his brother for more than three days.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1568\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The gates of the Garden are opened on
Mondays and Thursdays and every slave who does not associate anything
with Allah is forgiven except the man between whom and his brother there
is rancour. It is said, \'Wait until these two make it up! Wait until
these two make it up!\'\" \[Muslim\]

One variant has, \"Actions are presented every Thursday and Monday.\"

**270. Chapter: On the prohibition against envy**

> Envy (*hasad*) is to wish that someone with a blessing should lose it,
> whether it is in the deen or this world. Allah Almighty says, *\"Or do
> they in fact envy other people for the bounty Allah has granted
> them?*\" (W4:43; H4:54) The hadith from Anas in the previous chapter
> deals with it.

1569\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Beware of envy. Envy devours good actions as
fire devours wood.\" (or he said, \"dry grass\"). \[Abu Dawud\]

**271. Chapter: On the prohibition against spying**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"And do not spy on one another,\"* (49:12) and
> the Almighty says, *\"And those who abuse believing men and woman,
> when they have not merited it, bear the weight of slander and clear
> wrongdoing.\"* (33:58)

1570\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Beware of suspicion. Suspicion is the
falsest kind of speech. Do not spy or pry. Do not be rivals nor envy one
another. Do not hate one another nor show enmity to one another. Be
slaves of Allah, brothers, as you have been commanded to be. The Muslim
is the brother of the Muslim. He does not wrong him nor disappoint him
nor despise him. Godfearing is here,\" and he pointed to his chest. \"It
is enough evil for a man that he should despise his Muslim brother. The
blood, honour and property of every Muslim is sacred to another Muslim.
Allah does not look at your bodies nor your forms, but He looks at your
hearts and your actions.\"

In one variant, \"Do not envy one another nor hate one another nor spy
nor pry nor bid against one another to raise the price and be slaves of
Allah, brothers.\"

In one variant, \"Do not cut one another off nor show enmity to one
another. Do not hate one another nor envy one another. Be slaves of
Allah, brothers.

In one variant, \"Do not separate from one another nor should any of you
sell against the sale of someone else.\" \[Muslim has all of these
variants and al-Bukhari has some.\]

1571\. Mu\'awiya said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, say, \'If you seek out the faults of the
Muslims, you will corrupt them, or are about to corrupt them.\'\" \[Abu
Dawud\]

1572\. Ibn Mas\'ud reported that a man was brought to him and it was
said to him, \"This is so-and-so and he has drops of wine on his
beard.\" He said, \"We were forbidden to pry, but if something is clear
to us, then we punish for it.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

**272. Chapter: On the prohibition against having a bad opinion of the
Muslims unnecessarily**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"O you who believe! Avoid most suspicion.
> Indeed some suspicion is a crime.\"* (49:12)

1573\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Beware of suspicion. Suspicion is the
falsest kind of speech.\" \[Agreed upon\]

**273. Chapter: On forbidding against despising the Muslims**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"O you who believe! People should not ridicule
> others who may be better than themselves. Nor should any women
> ridicule other women who may be better than themselves. And do not
> find fault with one another or insult each other with derogatory
> nicknames. How evil it is to have a name for evil conduct after coming
> to belief! Those people who do not turn from it are wrongdoers.\"*
> (49:11) And the Almighty says, *\"Woe to every faultfinding
> backbiter.\"* (104:1)

1574\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"It is enough evil for a man to despise
his brother Muslim.\" \[Muslim\]

1575\. Ibn Mas\'ud reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who has an atom\'s weight of pride in
his heart will not enter the Garden!\" A man said, \"A man likes his
garment to be good and his sandals to be good.\" He said, \"Allah is
beautiful and loves beauty. Pride is to disregard the truth and to
despise people.\" \[Muslim\]

1576\. Jundub ibn \'Abdullah reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"A man says, \'By Allah,
Allah will never forgive so-and-so.\' Allah, the Mighty and Majestic,
says, \'Who is that who swears by Me that I will not forgive so-and so?
I have forgiven him and your action has come to nothing.\" \[Muslim\]

**274. Chapter: On the prohibition against gloating over a Muslim\'s
misfortune**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"The believers are brothers\"* (49:10) and the
> Almighty says, *\"People who love to see filth being spread about
> concerning the believers, will have a painful penalty both in this
> life and in the Hereafter.\"* (24:19)

1577\. Wathila ibn al-Asqa\' reported that the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Do not delight in someone
else\'s misfortune. Allah may have mercy on him and put you to the
test.\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

There is also the hadith transmitted from Abu Hurayra about spying which
was already mentioned: \"Every Muslim is sacred to another Muslim.\"

**275. Chapter: On forbidding attacking someone\'s lineage**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"And those who abuse believing men and woman,
> when they have not merited it, bear the weight of slander and clear
> wrongdoing.\"* (33:58)

1578\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Two things people do have disbelief in
them: attacking lineage and wailing over the dead.\" \[Muslim\]

**276. Chapter: On the prohibition against cheating and deceit**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"And those who abuse believing men and woman,
> when they have not merited it, bear the weight of slander and clear
> wrongdoing.\"* (33:58)

1579\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who carries arms against us is
not one of us. Anyone who cheats us is not one of us.\" \[Muslim\]

In one variant of his is that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, passed by a heap of grain and put his hand into
it and his fingers came upon some dampness. He said, \"Owner of this
grain, what is this?\" He said, \"The rain caught it, Messenger of
Allah.\" He said, \"Why did you not put it on top of the heap so that
the people could see it! Anyone who cheats us is not one of us.\"

1580\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Do not bid against each other in order
to raise the price.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1581\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, forbade outbidding others merely in order to raise the
price.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1582\. Ibn \'Umar said that a man mentioned to the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, that he was frequently deceived in
business. He said, \"When you buy, say, \'No cheating.\'\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1583\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who corrupts a man\'s wife or
slave is not one of us.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

**277. Chapter: On forbidding treachery**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"O you who believe! Fulfil your contracts,\"*
> (5:1) and the Almighty says, *\"Fulfil your contracts. Contracts will
> be asked about.\"* (17:34)

1584\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"If anyone has four characteristics, he
is a pure hypocrite, and if anyone has one of them, he has an aspect of
hypocrisy until he gives it up: whenever he is trusted, he betrays his
trust; whenever he speaks, he lies; when he makes an agreement, he
breaks it; and when he quarrels, he deviates from the truth, speaking
falsely.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1585\. Ibn Mas\'ud, Ibn \'Umar and Anas said, \"The Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \'Every traitor will have a banner
on the Day of Rising. It will announce, \'This is the treachery of
so-and-so.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1586\. Abu Mas\'ud al-Khudri reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Every traitor will have a banner behind
him on the Day of Rising which will be raised over him according to the
extent of his treachery. There is no traitor whose treachery is greater
than a people\'s ruler.\" \[Muslim\]

1587\. Abu Hurayra reported the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, who said, \"Allah Almighty said, \'I will be the antagonist
of three people on the Day of Rising: a man who makes a covenant in My
name and then betrays it, a man who sells a free man and then consumes
the money he gets for him, and a man who hires an employee and gets full
work from him and then does not pay him his wages.\'\" \[al-Bukhari\]

**278. Chapter: On the prohibition against using a gift to cause a sense
of indebtedness**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"You who believe! Do not nullify your sadaqa by
> demands for gratitude or insulting words,\"* (W:263; H2:264) and the
> Almighty says, *\"Those who spend their wealth in the Way of Allah,
> and then do not follow what they have spent by demands for gratitude
> or insulting words\"* (W2:261; H2:262)

1588\. Abu Dharr reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"There are three people that Allah will not
speak to nor look at nor purify on the Day of Rising, and they will have
a painful punishment.\" Abu Dharr said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said it three times.\" Abu Dharr
said, \"They are ruined and have lost! Who are they, Messenger of
Allah?\" He said, \"Someone who lets his garment hang down out of pride,
someone who makes people indebted to him through doing them favours and
someone who tries to sell his goods by making false oaths.\" \[Muslim\]

One of Muslim\'s variants has, \"Lets his wrapper hang down.\"

**279. Chapter: On the prohibition against boastfulness and arrogance**

> Allah says, *\"So do not claim purity for yourselves. He knows best
> those who have fear of Him,\"* (W53:31; H53:32) and the Almighty says,
> *\"There is only something against those who wrong people and act as
> tyrants in the earth without any right. Such people will have a
> painful punishment.\"* (W42:39: H42:42)

1589\. \'Iyad ibn Himar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Allah Almighty has revealed to me
that you should be humble in such a way that no one is either
overbearing or boastful towards another person.\" \[Muslim\]

1590\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"When a man says, \'The people are
destroyed,\' then he is of all of them, the most destroyed.\'\"
\[Muslim\]

This prohibition is when the person says this out of arrogance and to
demean the people and show his elevation over them. This is what is
unlawful. If he says it because of the lack of practice of the deen
which he sees in people and says it out of sorrow for them and for the
deen, there is no harm in it. That is the explanation of the scholars.
The notable scholars who said that include Malik ibn Anas, al-Khattabi,
al-Humaydi and others. I dealt with it in Kitab al-Adhkar.

**280. Chapter: On forbidding Muslims disassociating themselves from one
another for more than three days except in the cause of an innovation or
clear iniquity or the like**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"The believers are brothers, so make peace
> between your brothers\"* (49:10) and the Almighty says, *\"Do not help
> each other to wrongdoing and enmity.*\" (5:2)

1591\. Anas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Do not cut one another off nor have enmity
and hatred towards one another. Be slaves of Allah, brothers. It is not
lawful for a Muslim to cut himself off from his brother for more than
three days.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1592\. Abu Ayyub reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"It is not lawful for a Muslim to cut
himself off from his brother for more than three nights so that when
they meet this one turns aside and that one turns aside. The best of
them is the one who greets the other first.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1593\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Actions are presented every Monday and
Thursday, and Allah then forgives every man who does not associate
anything with Him except for a man who has rancour for his brother. He
says, \'Wait until these two make it up!\'\" \[Muslim\]

1594\. Jabir said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, say, \'Shaytan has despaired of being worshipped in
the Arabian peninsula by those who do the prayer, but he does sow
discord between them.\" \[Muslim\]

1595\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"It is not lawful for a Muslim to
separate from his brother for more than three days. Anyone who separates
himself for more than three days and then dies will enter the Fire.\"
\[Abu Dawud\]

1596\. Abu Khirash Hadrad ibn Abi Hadrad al-Aslami, also called
as-Sulami, the Companion, heard the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, say, \"Anyone who separates himself from his brother
for a year, it is as if he had shed his blood.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1597\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"It is not lawful for a believer to
separate from a believer for more than three days. If it goes beyond
three and he meets him, he should greet him. If he returns the greeting,
they share in the reward. If he does not return it, he returns with the
sin. A Muslim is someone who rejects separation.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

Abu Dawud said, \"When the separation is for the sake of Allah, none of
this applies.\"

**281. Chapter: On the prohibition against two people conversing to the
exclusion of a third without his permission except in case of need. It
is the same if two people speak in a language which he does not
understand.**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Conferring in secret is from Shaytan.\"*
> (58:10)

1598\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"When there are three together, two
should not speak privately to the exclusion of the third.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

Abu Dawud related it and added that Abu Salih said, \"I asked Ibn
\'Umar, \'What about four?\' He replied. \'It will not harm you.\'\"

Malik reported in *al-Muwatta\'* that \'Abdullah ibn Dinar said,
\"\'Abdullah ibn \'Umar and I were at the house of Khalid ibn \'Uqba who
was away at the market. A man came who wanted to speak to \'Abdullah ibn
Umar and I was the only other person present. \'Abdullah ibn Umar called
another man so that we were four and said to me and the man whom he had
called, \'Go a little way off together because I heard the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \"Two should not
converse to the exclusion of a third.\" \' \"

1599\. Ibn Mas\'ud reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"When you are three together, two should
not speak together privately apart from the other one until you come
together with other people because that might upset him.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

**282. Chapter: On the prohibition against cruelty to a slave, animal,
woman, or child without legitimate reason**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Worship Allah and do not associate anything
> with Him. Be good to your parents and relatives and to orphans and the
> very poor, and to neighbours who are related to you and neighbours who
> are not related to you, and to companions and travellers and your
> slaves. Allah does not love anyone vain or boastful.\"* (4:36)

1600\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"A woman was punished on account of a
cat which she shut up until it died and she entered the Fire. She
neither fed it nor gave it anything to drink when she confined it nor
did she allow it to eat the earth\'s rodents and insects.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1601\. Ibn \'Umar reported that he passed by two lads from Quraysh who
had set up a bird and were shooting at it. When they saw Ibn \'Umar,
they ran off. Ibn \'Umar said, \"Who did this? May Allah curse whoever
did this. The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, cursed people who used a live creature as a target.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1602\. Anas said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, forbade tying up animals so that they could be shot at
and killed.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1603\. Abu \'Ali Suwayd ibn Muqarrin said, \"I was one of seven brothers
of the Banu Muqarrin and we only had one servant. The youngest of us
slapped her and the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant
him peace, ordered us to set her free.\" \[Muslim\]

1604\. Abu Mas\'ud al-Badri said, \"I was beating a slave with a whip
when I heard a voice behind me saying, \'Know, Abu Mas\'ud\...\' I could
not make out the voice due to my anger. Then, when he drew near me,
there was the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, and he was saying, \'Know, Abu Mas\'ud, that Allah has given you
power over this slave.\' I said, \'I will never beat a slave after
this.\'\"

In one variant, \"The whip fell from his hands out of awe of him.\"

In one variant, \"I said, \'Messenger of Allah, he is free for the sake
of Allah Almighty.\' He said, \'If you had not done that, the Fire would
have burned you,\' or \'the Fire would have touched you.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1605\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Whoever strikes or slaps a slave of his
punishing him for something he did not do, his reparation is to set him
free.\" \[Muslim\]

1606\. Hisham ibn Hakim ibn Hizam reported that in Syria he passed by
some of the Nabatean peasants who had been made to stand in the sun with
oil poured on their heads. He said, \"What is this?\" He was told,
\"They are being punished on account of the land-tax.\" (One variant
has, \"They have been imprisoned on account of the *jizya*-tax.\")
Hisham said, \"I testify that I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \'Allah will punish those who
torture people in this world.\'\" He went to the amir and told him and
he commanded that they be released. \[Muslim\]

1607\. Ibn \'Abbas said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, saw a donkey with a branded face and he disliked
it.\" Ibn \'Abbas said, \"By Allah, I do not brand except as far away
from the face as possible.\" He commanded that his donkey should be
branded on its haunches. He was the first to brand on the haunches.
\[Muslim\]

1608\. Ibn \'Abbas reported that a donkey which had been branded on its
face passed by the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace. He
said, \"May Allah curse whoever branded it.\" \[Muslim\]

A variant of Muslim also has, \"The Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, forbade striking in the face and branding on the
face.\"

**283. Chapter: On forbidding punishing with fire any live creature,
even an ant**

1609\. Abu Hurayra said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, sent us out on an expedition and said, \'If you
meet so-and-so and so-and-so - two men of Quraysh whom he named - then
burn them with fire.\' We came to him to say good-bye and when we wanted
to leave, the Messenger of Allah , may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said, \'I ordered you to burn so-and-so and so-and-so with fire.
Only Allah punishes by fire. If you come across them, then kill
them.\'\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1610\. Ibn Mas\'ud said, \"We were with the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, on a journey and he went to relieve
himself. We saw a red bird with two chicks and took the chicks. The red
bird came and began to flap its wings. The Prophet, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, came back and said, \'Who has distressed this bird
by taking its young? Return her young to her.\' He saw an ant hill which
we had set alight. He said, \'Who has set fire to this?\' We replied,
\'We did.\' He said, \'Only the Lord of the Fire should punish with
fire.\'\" \[Abu Dawud\]

**284. Chapter: On forbidding the rich person to procrastinate paying
what he owes**

> Allah says, *\"Allah commands you to return to their owners the things
> you hold on trust,\"* (W4:57; H4:58) and the Almighty says, *\"If you
> leave things on trust with another, let the one who is trusted must
> deliver up his trust.\"* (2:283)

1611\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The procrastination of a rich man is
injustice. If the debt of one of you is owed is transferred for payment
to a rich man, he should accept the transfer.\" \[Agreed upon\]

**285. Chapter: On it being disliked for a man to take back his gift
whether he has handed it over to the other person or not, and on the
gift given to his son, whether it has been handed over or not. On it
being disliked to purchase something which he had given as sadaqa, paid
as zakat or in expiation from the one to whom he gave it, but there is
no objection to him buying it from a third party**

1612\. Ibn \'Abbas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Someone who takes back a gift is like a
dog returning to its own vomit.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1613\. \'Umar ibn al-Khattab said, \"I gave away (a mount) a horse in
the way of Allah and the person who had it did not look after it
properly. I wanted to buy it back and thought that he would sell it
cheaply. I asked the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
and he said, \'Do not buy it nor take back your sadaqa even if he were
to give it to you for a dirham. The one who takes back his sadaqa is
like the one who swallows his own vomit.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

**286. Chapter: On stressing the inviolability of an orphan\'s
property**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"People who consume the property of orphans
> wrongfully consume nothing in their bellies except Fire. They will
> roast in a Searing Blaze!\"* (W4:9; H4:10) and the Almighty says,
> *\"And that you do not go near the property of orphans Š except in a
> good way.\"* (W6:153; H6:152) The Almighty says, *\"They will ask you
> about the property of orphans. Say, \'Managing it in their best
> interests is best.\' If you mix your property with theirs, they are
> your brothers. Allah knows a squanderer from a good manager.*\"
> (W2:218; H2:220)

1614\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Avoid the seven fatal sins.\" They said,
\"Messenger of Allah, what are they?\" He said, \"Associating with
Allah, sorcery, killing a soul which Allah has forbidden, except by
legal right, consuming usury, consuming the property of an orphan,
fleeing on the day of battle and slandering unthinking chaste believing
women.\" \[Agreed upon\]

**287. Chapter: On the stern prohibition of usury**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Those who practise usury will not rise from
> the grave except as someone driven mad by Shaytan\'s touch. That is
> because they say, \'Trade is the same as usury.\' But Allah has
> permitted trade and He has forbidden usury. Whoever is given a warning
> by his Lord and then desists, can keep what he received in the past
> and his affair is up to Allah. But all who return to it will be the
> Companions of the Fire, remaining in it timelessly, forever. Allah
> obliterates usury but makes sadaqa grow in value!\" to His words \"O
> you who believe! Show fear of Allah and forgo any remaining usury.\"*
> (W2:274-277; H2:275-278)

1615\. Ibn Mas\'ud said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, cursed those who take usury and those who pay it.\"
\[Muslim\]

At-Tirmidhi added, \"And the witnesses to it and those who write it
down.\"

**288. Chapter: On forbidding showing-off**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"They were only ordered to worship Allah,
> making their deen sincerely His as people of pure natural faith,\"*
> (98:5) and the Almighty says, *\"Do not nullify your sadaqa by demands
> for gratitude or insulting words, like him who spends his wealth,
> showing off to people.\"* (W2:263; H2:264) The Almighty says,
> *\"Showing off to people, and only remembering Allah a very* little.\"
> (W4:141; H4:142)

1616\. Abu Hurayra said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \'Allah Almighty says, \"Of all
those to whom association is attributed, I am the furthest removed from
what is associated with Me. Anyone who does an action in which he
associates other than Me with Me, I abandon him and what he
associates.\"\'\" \[Muslim\]

1617\. Abu Hurayra said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \'The first of people to be judged
on the Day of Rising will be a man who was martyred. He will be brought
and will be informed of the blessings he had and will acknowledge them.
Allah will say, \"What did you do with them?\" He will say, \"I fought
for You until I was martyred.\" Allah will say, \"You lie. Rather you
fought so it would be said, \'A bold man!\' And so it was said.\" Then
the command will be given and he will be dragged on his face until he is
thrown into the Fire. There will also be a man who studied knowledge and
taught it and recited the Qur\'an. He will be brought and informed of
his blessings which he will acknowledge. Allah will say, \"What did you
do with them?\" He will say, \"I studied knowledge and taught it and I
recited the Qur\'an for You.\" He will say, \"You lie. Rather you
studied so that it would be said, \'A scholar!\' and you recited so that
it would be said, \'He is a reciter!\' And so it was said.\" Then the
command will be given and he will be dragged on his face until he is
thrown into the Fire. There will also be a man to whom Allah gave a lot
of wealth and all sorts of property. He will be brought and informed of
his blessings which he will acknowledge. Allah will say, \"What did you
do with them?\" He will say, \"There was no path in which You like
spending to be done but that I spent in it for You.\" He will say, \"You
lie. Rather you did it so that it would be said, \'He is generous.\' and
so it was said.\" Then the command will be given and he will be dragged
on his face until he is thrown into the Fire.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1618\. Ibn \'Umar stated that some people said to him, \"We visit our
sultans and speak differently to them than we do when we leave them.\"
Ibn \'Umar said, \"In the time of the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, we used to consider this hypocrisy.\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

1619\. Jundub ibn \'Abdullah ibn Sufyan said that the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Whoever wants his action to be
known, Allah will make him known \[i.e. on the Day of Rising\], and
whoever wants to be seen, Allah will make him seen \[then\].\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1620\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who learns knowledge which
should be learned for the sake of Allah, the Mighty and Majestic, only
to obtain by it goods of this world, will not experience the scent of
the Garden on the Day of Rising.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

**289. Chapter: What might be considered showing-off, but which is not
actually showing-off**

1621\. Abu Dharr said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, was asked, \'What do you think of a man who does a good
action and people praise him for it?\' He replied, \'That is the
immediate good news of the believer.\'\" \[Muslim\]

**290. Chapter: On forbidding looking at unrelated women and handsome
youths without a legitimate reason**

> Allah says, *\"Say to the believing men that they should lower their
> eyes,\"* (24:30) and He says, *\"Hearing, sight and hearts will all be
> questioned.\"* (17:36) Allah says, *\"He knows the eyes,\' deceit and
> what people\'s breasts conceal,\"* (40:19) and He says, *\"Your Lord
> is always lying in wait.\"* (89:14)

1622\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Prescribed for the son of Adam is his portion
of adultery which he must inevitably acquire. The adultery of the eyes
is the glance. The adultery of the ears is listening. The adultery of
the tongue is speech. The adultery of the hand is the grasp. The
adultery of the foot is the step. The heart yearns and desires. The
genitals either confirm this or deny it.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1623\. Abu Sa\'id al-Khudri reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Beware of sitting in the roadways.\"
They said, \"Messenger of Allah. we must have places where we can sit
and talk together.\" The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"If you must sit there, then give the roadway
its rights.\" They asked, \"What are the rights of the roadway,
Messenger of Allah?\" He said, \"Lowering the eye, refraining from
causing annoyance, returning the greeting, commanding the right and
forbidding the wrong.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1624\. Abu Talha Zayd ibn Sahl said, \"We were sitting in the area in
front of the house, talking there, when the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, came and stood over us and said,
\'What have you to do with roadside gatherings. Avoid roadside
gatherings!\' We said, \'We have only sat down to do something which has
no harm in it. We were merely conferring and conversing.\' He said. \'If
you must do it, then give it the rights which are due to it: lowering
the eyes, returning the greeting and speaking well.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1625\. Jarir said, \"I asked the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, about the unintentional glance. He said, \'Avert
your eyes.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1626\. Umm Salama said, \"I was with the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, when Maymuna was with him. Ibn Umm Maktum
came, and that was after we had been commanded to veil ourselves. The
Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \'Veil
yourselves from him.\' We said, \'But Messenger of Allah, is he not
blind and therefore not able to see us or recognise us?\' The Prophet,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \'Are you two blind? Do
you not see him?\'\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1627\. Abu Sa\'id reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"A man should not look at another man\'s
private parts nor a woman at another woman\'s private parts. Two men
should not lie naked under the same cover nor two women under the same
cover.\" \[Muslim\]

**291. Chapter: On the prohibition against being alone with an unrelated
woman**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"When you ask his wives for something ask them
> from behind a screen.\"* (33:53)

1628\. \'Uqba ibn \'Amir reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Beware of visiting women!\" A man
of the Ansar said, \"What do you think about in-laws?\" He said,
\"In-laws are death!\" \[Agreed upon\]

1629\. Ibn \'Abbas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"None of you should be on your own with
a woman unless there is a close relative of hers present (*dhu
mahram*).\" \[Agreed upon\]

1630\. Burayda reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"The inviolability of the women of those
doing jihad with respect to those who stay behind is like the
inviolability of your mothers. Any man who stays behind looking after
the family of one of the fighters and then betrays him in respect of
them, will have to stand before him on the Day of Rising and he will
take from him any of his good actions he wishes until he is satisfied.\"
Then the Messenger of Allah , may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
turned to us and said, \"What do you think about that!\'\" \[Muslim\]

**292. Chapter: On forbidding men trying to look like women and women
trying to look like men in clothing, movements, etc.**

1631\. Ibn \'Abbas said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, cursed effeminate men and masculine women.\"

In one variant, \"The Messenger of Allah cursed men who made themselves
look like women and women who made themselves look like men.\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

1632\. Abu Hurayra said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, cursed any man who wears women\'s clothes and any
woman who wears men\'s clothes.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1633\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"There are two categories among the
people of the Fire that I have not seen: a people who have whips like
the tails of cattle with which they beat people, and women who are both
dressed and naked, who are deviant and make others deviant. Their heads
resemble the humps of Bactrian camels. They will not enter the Garden
nor even smell its scent, and its scent can be discerned at
such-and-such a distance.\" \[Muslim\]

The meaning of \"dressed\" is having Allah\'s blessing and \"naked\" is
lacking thankfulness for it. It is said that it means that they cover
part of their body and expose part of it to display their beauty. It is
said that they wear thin garments which show the body, \"Deviant\" means
that they decline to obey Allah and what they are commanded to guard.
\"Making others deviant\" means that they teach others to behave like
them. It is said that \"deviant\" actually means to walk in a conceited
manner, swinging the shoulders. It is also said that it refers to
hairstyle used by prostitutes. \"Their heads resemble the humps of
Bactrian camels\" refers to making them large by turbans and the like.\"

**293. Chapter: On the prohibition against being like Shaytan and the
unbelievers**

1634\. Jabir reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Do not eat with the left hand. Shaytan eats
and drinks with the left hand.\" \[Muslim\]

1635\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"None of you should eat with his left
hand nor drink with it. Shaytan eats with his left hand and drinks with
it.\" \[Muslim\]

1636\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The Jews and Christians do not dye, so
do the opposite of them.\" \[Agreed upon\]

What is meant is dyeing white hair and the beard yellow or red, Black is
forbidden as will be mentioned.

**294. Chapter: On the prohibition against a man or woman dyeing their
hair black**

1637\. Jabir said, \"Abu Quhafa, the father of Abu Bakr as-Siddiq, was
brought on the day of the conquest of Makka with his head and beard pure
white. The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
said, \'Change this, but avoid black.\'\" \[Muslim\]

**295. Chapter: On the prohibition against shaving only part of the head
and the permission for a man, but not a woman to shave it all**

1638\. Ibn \'Umar said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, forbade shaving part of the head.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1639\. Ibn \'Umar said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, saw a boy who had shaved part of his hair and left
part of it and he forbade that, saying, \'Shave it all or leave it
all.\'\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1640\. \'Abdullah ibn Ja\'far reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, delayed going to the family of Ja\'far for
three days and then he came to them and said, \"Do not weep for my
brother after today.\' Then he said, \'Summon my brother\'s children for
me.\' We were brought as if we were chicks. He said, \'Call a barber for
me.\' He instructed him to shave our heads.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1641\. \'Ali said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, forbade a woman to shave her head.\" \[an-Nasa\'i\]

**296. Chapter: On forbidding joining on false hair, tattooing, and
filing the teeth**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"What they call on apart from Him are female
> idols. What they call on is an arrogant shaytan whom Allah has cursed.
> He said, \'I will take a certain fixed proportion of Your slaves. I
> will lead them astray and fill them with false hopes. I will command
> them and they will cut off cattle\'s ears. I will command them and
> they will change Allah¹s creation.\'\"* (W4:116-118; H4:117-118)

1642\. Asma\' reported that a woman asked the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, \"O Messenger of Allah, my daughter was
afflicted by measles and her hair fell out. I have given her in
marriage, can I join on other hair to hers?\" He said, \"Allah has
cursed anyone who joins hair together and the person to whose hair it is
joined.\" \[Agreed upon\]

One variant has, \"The woman who joins hair and the woman who asks for
it to be done.\"

The like of it is related from \'A\'isha. \[Agreed upon\]

1643\. Humayd ibn \'Abdu\'r-Rahman reported that he heard Mu\'awiya on
the minbar in the year when he made pilgrimage. He took a bunch of hair
which was in the hand of a guard and said, \"O people of Madina! Where
are your men of knowledge? I heard the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, forbid the like of this and say, \'The tribe of Israel
was destroyed when their women adopted this.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1644\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, cursed anyone who joins hair together and the person
asks for it to be joined, and the tattooer and the woman who is
tattooed. \[Agreed upon\]

1645\. Ibn Mas\'ud said, \"Allah curses women who tattoo and are
tattoed, women who pluck their eyebrows, and women who file their teeth
to make gaps for beauty, altering Allah\'s creation!\" A woman spoke to
him about that and he said, \"Why should I not curse those the Messenger
of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, cursed when that is
in the Book of Allah? Allah Almighty says*, \'So take what the Messenger
assigns to you, and deny yourselves that which he withholds from you.*\'
(59:7)\" \[Agreed upon\]

**297. Chapter: On the prohibition against plucking out white hair from
the beard and head, and against a young man plucking out the hair of his
beard when it first appears**

1646\. \'Amr ibn Shu\'ayb reported from his grandfather that the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Do not pluck
out white hair. It will be the light of a Muslim on the Day of Rising.\"
\[at-Tirmidhi\]

1647\. \'A\'isha reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who does an action which we have
not commanded will be rejected.\" \[Muslim\]

**298. Chapter: On it being disliked to clean oneself in the lavatory
with the right hand and to touch the genitals with the right hand for no
reason**

1648\. Abu Qatada reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"When one of you urinates, he should not hold
his private part with his right hand nor should he cleanse with his
right hand, and he should not breathe into a (drinking) vessel.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

**299. Chapter: On it being disliked to walk in only one shoe or sock
for no reason, and on it being disliked to put on shoes and socks while
standing for no reason**

1649\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"None of you should walk wearing only
one sandal. You should wear both of them or leave both of them off.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

In one variant, \"Or take them both off.\"

1650\. Abu Hurayra said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \'When the strap of the sandal of
one of you breaks, he should not walk wearing the other until he has
mended it.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1651\. Jabir reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, forbade a man to do up his sandals standing up.
\[Abu Dawud\]

**300. Chapter: On the prohibition against leaving a fire and the like
burning, whether in a lamp or anything else, when going to sleep**

1652\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Do not leave fire burning in your houses when
you sleep.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1653\. Abu Musa said, \"A house burned down with its inhabitants in
Madina one night and when the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, was informed about it, he said, \'Fire is an enemy
to you. When you go to sleep, put it out.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1654\. Jabir reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Cover up containers and tie up water-skins.
Lock the door and put out the lamp. Shaytan does not open up a
water-container, open a door nor remove a cover. If one of you can find
nothing except a piece of food to place over his container together with
mentioning Allah\'s name, he should do that. A mouse can set a house
alight around its inhabitants.\" \[Muslim\]

**301. Chapter: On the prohibition of affectation, which are words and
actions which are without benefit**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Say, \'I do not ask you for any wage for it,
> for am I a man of false pretensions.\"* (38:86)

1655\. Ibn \'Umar said, \"We were forbidden affectation.\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

1656\. Masruq said, \"We visited \'Abdullah ibn Mas\'ud and he said, \'O
people! Whoever knows something should say it. Whoever does not know,
should say, \"Allah knows best.\" Part of knowledge is that you say
about what you do not know, \"Allah knows best.\" Allah Almighty said to
His Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, *\"Say, \'I do not
ask you for any wage for it, for am I a man of false pretensions.\"*
(38:86)\'\" \[al-Bukhari\]

**302. Chapter: On forbidding wailing over the dead, slapping the
cheeks, tearing the shirt, pulling out the hair and shaving it, and
against praying for destruction**

1657\. \'Umar ibn al-Khattab said, \"The dead person is punished in his
grave for the wailing done over him.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1658\. Ibn Mas\'ud reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Someone who strikes his cheeks, tears
his garments and calls out the cries of the Jahiliyya is not one of
us.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1659\. Abu Burda said, \"Abu Musa was ill and fainted. His head was in
the lap of one of the women of his family and he was unable to reply to
anything. When he came to, he said, \'I declare myself free of those
from whom the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, declared himself free.\' The Messenger of Allah declared himself
free from women who slap their faces, shave their heads and tear their
clothes.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1660\. al-Mughira ibn Shu\'ba said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \"Anyone who is wailed
over is punished by the wailing over him on the Day of Rising.\'\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1661\. Umm \'Atiyya Nusayba said, \"At the time of the oath of
allegiance, the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
imposed on us that we should not wail.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1662\. An-Nu\'man ibn Bashir said, \"\'Abdullah ibn Rawaha fainted and
his sister began to weep and say, \'What a paragon he was!\' and this
and that, repeating them. When he recovered consciousness, he said,
\'You did not say anything without it being said to me, \"Are you really
like that?\"\'\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1663\. Ibn \'Umar said, \"Sa\'d ibn \'Ubada fell ill and the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, came to visit him with
\'Abdu\'r-Rahman ibn \'Awf, Sa\'d ibn Abi Waqqas and \'Abdullah ibn
Mas\'ud. When he arrived, he found him in a stupor and said, \'Has he
died?\' They said, \'No, Messenger of Allah.\' The Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, wept. When the people saw the Prophet
weeping, they wept. He said, \'Listen, Allah does not punish on account
of the tears of the eyes nor for the grief of the heart, but he punishes
or shows mercy on account of this,\' and he pointed to his tongue.\'\"
\[Agreed upon\]

1664\. Abu Malik al-Ash\'ari said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, said, \"When someone who wails fails to
repent before she dies, she will be raised up on the Day of Rising with
trousers of tar and a mangy chemise.\" \[Muslim\]

1665\. Usayd ibn Abi Usayd at-Tabi\'i from one of the women who gave
homage who said, \"Among the things the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, made us agree to regarding correct
behaviour in respect of which we promised not to disobey him were not
scratching our faces nor wailing nor tearing our shirts nor pulling out
our hair.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1666\. Abu Musa reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"There is no one who dies whose mourners
then stand and say, \'O chief! O master!\' or similar things without two
angels being delegated to him to prod him in the chest saying, \"Were
you really like that?\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1667\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Two things people do have disbelief in
them: attacking lineage and wailing over the dead.\" \[Muslim\]

**303. Chapter: The prohibition against going to soothsayers,
astrologers, diviners and looking for omens**

1668\. \'A\'isha said, \"Some people asked the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, about soothsayers, and he said,
\'They have nothing.\' They said, \'O Messenger of Allah, they tell us
something about those of us who are alive and then it sometimes comes
true.\' The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
said, \'That is a word of truth which a jinn got hold of and then cast
into the ear of his helper, but they mix a hundred lies with it.\'\"
\[Agreed upon\]

In a variant of al-Bukhari, \'A\'isha heard the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \"The angels descend into the
clouds mentioning something which has been decreed in heaven. Then
Shaytan eavesdrops and hears it and then reveals it to the soothsayers.
Along with it, they tell a hundred lies from themselves.\"

1669\. Safiyya bint Abi \'Ubayd reported from one of the wives of the
Prophet, from that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
said, \"If anyone goes to a diviner and asks about something and
believes it, his prayer will not be accepted for forty days.\"
\[Muslim\]

1670\. Qabisa ibn al-Mukhariq said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \'Divining, augury and
taking omens from the flight of birds are part of idolatry.\'\" \[Abu
Dawud\]

1671\. Ibn \'Abbas said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \'Anyone who takes knowledge from the stars,
takes a branch of sorcery and his sorcery increases according to the
amount of knowledge he gains.\'\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1672\. Mu\'awiya ibn al-Hakam said, \"I said, \'O Messenger of Allah, I
was recently in the state of Jahiliyya and then Allah Almighty brought
Islam, but there are still men among us who go to soothsayers.\' He
said, \'Do not go to them.\' I said, \"There are still men among us who
look for omens.\' He said, \'That is something which they find in their
breasts. They should not be influenced by them.\' I said, \'There are
men among us who draw divining lines.\' He said, \'One of the Prophets
used to draw lines. Whoever has his lines coincide, that is that.\'\"
\[Muslim\]

1673\. Abu Mas\'ud al-Badri reported that the Messenger of Allah forbade
the proceeds from the sale of dogs, money earned through prostitution
and the earnings of a soothsayer. \[Agreed upon\]

**304. Chapter: On the prohibition against believing in bad omens**

1674\. Anas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"There is no infection and there are no bad
omens, although I am pleased by a good omen.\" They said, \"What is a
good omen?\" He said, \"A good word.\"\[Agreed upon\]

1675\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"There is no infection and there are no bad
omens. If there is bad luck in anything, it is in houses, women and
horses.\"\[Agreed upon\]

1676\. Burayda said that the Prophet did not look for omens. \[Abu
Dawud\]

1677\. \'Urwa ibn \'Amir said, \"Divination was mentioned in the
presence of the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace. He said, \"The best of it is omens, but they do not deter a
Muslim. If one of you sees something he dislikes, he should say, \'O
Allah, none but You can bring good things and none but You can repel
evil things. There is no power nor strength except by You.\'\" \[Abu
Dawud\]

**305. Chapter: On the prohibition against depicting living creatures on
rugs, stones, clothes, dirhams, cushions, dinars, pillows, etc. The
prohibition against putting images on walls, curtains, turbans, clothes,
etc. The command to efface images**

1678\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Those who make images will be punished
on the Day of Rising. They will be told, \'Bring to life what you have
created.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1679\. \'A\'isha said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, came from a journey and I had screened off a shelf of
mine with a curtain which had some figures on it. When the Messenger of
Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, saw it, he ripped it
down and his face changed colour. He said, \'\'A\'isha, the people with
the worst punishment with Allah on the Day of Rising will be those who
make things like Allah\'s creation.\'\" She said, \"So we cut it up and
made one or two cushions from it.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1680\. Ibn \'Abbas said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \'Everyone who makes images will
have a soul appointed for him in the Fire for every image he made and it
will punish him in the Fire.\'\" Ibn \'Abbas said, \"If you must do it,
then make trees or anything else which is inanimate.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1681\. Ibn \'Abbas said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \'Anyone who makes an image in this
world, will be obliged to breathe life into it on the Day of Rising, and
he will never breathe life into it.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1682\. Ibn Mas\'ud said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \'Allah Almighty says, \'The people
with the worst punishment on the Day of Rising will be those who made
images.\"\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1683\. Abu Hurayra said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \'Allah Almighty says, \"Who does a
greater wrong than someone who goes about creating in imitation of My
creation? Let them see if they can create an ant or create a single
grain or create a barley seed!\"\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1684\. Abu Talha reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Angels do not enter a house in which
there is a dog or an image.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1685\. Ibn \'Umar said, \"Jibril promised the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, that he would come to him but he
was slow in coming and that was hard on the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace. He went out and Jibril met him and
he complained to him. He said, \'We do not enter a house in which there
is a dog or an image.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

1686\. \'A\'isha said, \"Jibril, peace be upon him, made an arrangement
with the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace,
for a time when he would come. That hour came but he did not come.\" She
said, \"He had a staff in his hand and cast it from his hand, saying,
\'Neither does Allah break His promise nor do His Messengers.\" Then he
turned round and there was a puppy dog under his seat. He said, \'When
did this dog come in?\" I said, \'By Allah, I was not aware of it.\' He
commanded that it be taken out and then Jibril, peace be upon him, came
to him and the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said, \'You made an arrangement with me and I sat waiting for you
but you did not come.\' He said, \'The dog which was in your house
prevented me. We do not enter a house in which there is a dog or an
image.\'\" \[Muslim\]

1687\. Abu\'l-Hayyaj Hayyan ibn Husayn said, \"\'Ali ibn Abi Talib said
to me, \'Shall I send you with the same instructions with which the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, sent me? Do
not go past a picture without obliterating it nor an elevated grave
without levelling it.\'\" \[Muslim\]

**306. Chapter: The prohibition against keeping a dog except for
hunting, herding or farming**

1688\. Ibn \'Umar said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \'If anyone acquires a dog - except
one for hunting or herding - his reward is decreased by two qirats every
day.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1689\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Someone who keeps a dog loses a qirat
of his actions every day - unless it is a farm dog or cattle dog.\".
\[Agreed upon\]

In a variant of Muslim, \"If anyone acquires a dog which is not for
hunting, herds or the earth, his reward is decreased by two qirats every
day.\"

**307. Chapter: On it being disliked to hang bells from camels and other
animals, and it being disliked to be accompanied by a dog or bell in a
journey**

1690\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"The angels do not keep the company of
any group in which there is a dog or a bell.\" \[Muslim\]

1691\. Abu Hurayra said, \"Bells are the flutes of Shaytan.\" \[Muslim\]

**308. Chapter: On it being disliked to ride a camel that eats dung. If
it then eats pure fodder and its flesh is wholesome, then the dislike is
removed**

1692\. Ibn \'Umar said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, forbade riding camels that eat dung.\" \[Muslim\]

**309. Chapter: The prohibition against spitting in the mosque and the
command to remove spit from it when it is found there. The command to
keep the mosque free of impurities**

1693\. Anas reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said, \"Spitting in the mosque is a wrong action and its
expiation is to bury it.\" \[Agreed upon\]

What is meant by burying it is to cover it with earth when the floor of
the mosque consists of dirt, sand or the like. Abu\'l-Mahasin ar-Ruyani,
one of our companions, said in his book, al-Bahr, \"It is said that what
is meant by \'burying it\' is to remove it from the mosque. If the
mosque is paved or whitewashed and he rubs it with his shoe or something
else as many ignorant people do, that is not burying it. It is
increasing the error and the amount of filth in the mosque. After that
the person who did that should wipe it with a cloth or his hand or
something else or wash it,\"

1694\. \'A\'isha reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, saw some mucous, spittle or phlegm on the wall
of the qibla and he scraped it off. \[Agreed upon\]

1695\. Anas reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"These mosques are not a suitable place for
any of this urine or filth. They are for remembrance of Allah Almighty
and reciting the Qur\'an,\" or as the Messenger of Allah said.
\[Muslim\]

**310. Chapter: On it being disliked to argue in the mosque or to raise
voices there, announce a lost animal, buy and sell, rent and other
transactions**

1696\. Abu Hurayra heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, say, \"Anyone who hears a man asking about an animal he
has lost in the mosque should say, \'May Allah not restore it to you.
Mosques were not built for this.\" \[Muslim\]

1697\. Abu Hurayra reported that Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"When you see someone buying or selling in
the mosque, then say, \'May Allah not give you any profit in your
trading.\' When you see someone asking there about a lost animal, then
say, \'May Allah not restore it to you.\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

1698\. Burayda said that a man made an announcement in the mosque
saying, \"Who will find the red camel for me?\' The Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"May you not find it.
The mosques were only built for what they were built for.\" \[Muslim\]

1699\. \'Amr ibn Shu\'ayb reported from his grandfather that the
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, forbade
buying and selling in the mosque and for a lost animal to be asked about
in it or for poetry to be recited in it.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

1700\. As-Sa\'ib ibn Yazid the Companion said, \"Once when I was
standing in the mosque, a man threw some stones at me. I looked and it
was \'Umar ibn al-Khattab. He said, \'Go and bring those two men to
me.\' I brought them and he said, \'Who are you two?\' or \'Where are
you from?\' They said, \'From the people of at-Ta\'if.\' He said, \'If
you were from the people of this city, I would have punished you. You
were raising your voices in the mosque of the Messenger of Allah.\'\"
\[al-Bukhari\]

**311. Chapter: On the prohibition against entering the mosque for the
one who eats eating garlic, onions, leeks, and other things which have
an objectionable smell until its smell departs, except in case of
necessity**

1701\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said during the expedition to Khaybar, \"Anyone who
eats any of this plant, i.e. garlic, should not come near our mosque.\"
\[Agreed upon\]

In a variant of Muslim, \"our mosques.\"

1702\. Anas reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and grant him
peace, said, \"Anyone who has eaten any of this plant, should not come
near us or pray with us.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1703\. Jabir reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who eats garlic and onions should
keep away from us (or he said, \"should keep away from our mosque\")
\[Agreed upon\]

1704\. \'Umar ibn al-Khattab reported that on the Day of Jumu\'a he gave
an address in which he said, \"Then you, O people, eat two plants which
I only see as having a foul smell: onions and garlic. I saw that when
Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, smelt them
coming from a man in the mosque, he commanded him to go out, and he was
taken out to al-Baqi\'. Anyone who eats them should kill them through
cooking.\" \[Muslim\]

**312. Chapter: On it being disliked to sit with the legs up on the day
of *Jumu\'a* while the Imam was giving the *khutba* because that makes
one sleepy and he will not miss properly to the khutba and he might
break *wudu\'***

1705\. Mu\'adh ibn Anas al-Juhani reported that the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, forbade people to sit with their legs up
against their chest on the day of Jumu\'a while the Imam was giving the
khutba.\" \[Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi\]

**313. Chapter: When someone wants to sacrifice on the tenth of
Dhu\'l-Hijja, he is prohibited from cutting any of his hair or nails
until he has sacrificed**

1706\. Umm Salama reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"If anyone has an animal to sacrifice
and the new moon of Dhu\'l-Hijja comes, he should not cut his hair or
nails until he has sacrificed.\" \[Muslim\]

**314. Chapter: The prohibition against swearing by a creature like the
Prophet, the Ka\'ba, the angels, heaven, fathers, life, the spirit, the
head, the life of the Sultan, the blessing of the Sultan, one\'s land,
and trustworthiness. It is the strongest possible prohibition**

1707\. Ibn \'Umar reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Allah Almighty forbids you to swear an oath by
your fathers. If someone swears an oath, he should swear by Allah or be
silent.\" \[Agreed upon\]

1708\. \'Abdu\'r-Rahman ibn Samura reported that the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"Do not swear by idols
or by your fathers.\" \[Muslim\]

1709\. Burayda reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who swears by trustworthiness is not
one of us.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1710\. Burayda reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him
and grant him peace, said, \"If anyone swears an oath saying, \'I am no
longer a Muslim \[if I am not speaking the truth\],\' if he is lying, it
is as he said and if he is speaking the truth, he will not return to
Islam unblemished.\" \[Abu Dawud\]

1711\. Ibn \'Umar reported that he heard a man say, \"No, by the
Ka\'ba.\" Ibn \'Umar said, \"Do not swear by other than Allah. I heard
the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and grant him peace, say,
\'Anyone who swears by other than Allah has rejected - or
associated.\'\" \[at-Tirmidhi\]

**315. Chapter: On the strong prohibition against deliberate false
oaths**

1712\. Ibn Mas\'ud reported that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who swears an oath to get hold of some
property belonging to a Muslim to which he has no right will meet Allah
and find Him angry with him.\" Then the Messenger of Allah may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, recited to us confirmation of this from
the Book of Allah, the Mighty and Majestic*, \"Those Allah \'s contract
and their own oaths for a paltry price\...\"* to the end of the ayat
(3:77). \[Agreed upon\]

1713\. Abu Umama Iyas ibn Tha\'laba al-Harithi reported that the
Messenger of Allah may Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"If
anyone cuts off the right of a Muslim man by an oath he makes, Allah has
made the Fire mandatory for him and forbidden him the Garden.\' A man
said to him, \'Even if it is something insignificant, Messenger of
Allah?\' He said, \'Even if it is only a piece of arak-stick.\'\"
\[Muslim\]

1714\. \'Abdullah ibn \'Amr ibn al-\'As reported that the Prophet may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, \"The major sins are:
associating something else with Allah, disobedience to parents, murder
and making false oaths.\" \[al-Bukhari\]

In one variant, a bedouin came to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
grant him peace, and said, \"Messenger of Allah, what are the major
sins?\" He said, \"Associating something else with Allah.\" He said,
\"Then what?\" He said, \"Making false oaths.\" I said, \"What is a
false oath.\" He said, \"That by which the property of a Muslim man is
misappropriated,\" meaning that someone lies in the oath.

**316. Chapter: On the recommendation for someone who has sworn an oath
and then sees something better than it to do what he swore he swore he
would not do and expiate the oath**

1715\. \'Abdu\'r-Rahman ibn Samura said, \"The Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, told me, \'When you swear an oath
\[to do something\] and you think that something else is better than it,
then do the thing which is better and expiate your oath.\'\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1716\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"Anyone who swears an oath and then sees
something better than it, should expiate his oath and do the thing which
is better.\" \[Muslim\]

1717\. Abu Musa reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"By Allah, if Allah wills, I will never
make an oath and then see something better than it without doing
expiation for my oath and doing the thing that is better.\" \[Agreed
upon\]

1718\. Abu Hurayra reported that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and grant him peace, said, \"That one of you should persist in his
oath in respect of his family is more sinful for you in the sight of
Allah Almighty than him performing the expiation which Allah has
prescribed for it.\" \[Agreed upon\]

**317. Chapter: On minor oaths being of no consequence and not entailing
expiation. That is what one says unintentionally like, \"No, by Allah\"
and \"Yes, by Allah.\"**

> Allah Almighty says, *\"Allah does not take you to task for your
> inadvertent oaths, but He will take you to task for oaths you make
> intentionally. The expiation in that case is to feed ten poor people
> with the average amount you feed your family, or to clothe them, or to
> free a slave. Anyone without the means to do so should fast three
> days. That is the expiation for breaking oaths when you have sworn
> them. Keep to your oaths.*\" (W5:91; H5:89)

1719\. \'A\'isha said, \"This ayat, \'Allah will not call you to account
for what is futile in your oaths,\' was sent down about when a man says,
\'No, by Allah,\' and \'Yes, by Allah.\'\"

**318. Chapter: On it being disliked to use oaths when selling, even if
it true**

1720\. Abu Hurayra said, \"I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, say, \'Making oaths hastens the sale of
goods but eradicates the blessings.\'\" \[Agreed upon\]

1721\. Abu Qatada reported that he heard the Messenger of Allah, may
Allah bless him and grant him peace, say, \"Beware of making a lot of
oaths in respect of sales. It hastens them and then wipes them out.\"
\[Muslim\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[Previous Page](riyad7.html)**

**[Next Page](riyad9.html)**

[**Return to Home Page**](index.html)
